Chapter 2
Deterministic Models:
Preliminaries
2.1 Framework and Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2 Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.3 Classes of Schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.4C omplexity Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Over the last fifty years a considerable amount of research effort has been focused
on deterministic scheduling. The number and variety of models considered
is astounding. During this time a notation has evolved that succinctly captures
the structure of many (but for sure not all) deterministic models that have been
considered in the literature.
The first section in this chapter presents an adapted version of this notation.
The second section contains a number of examples and describes some of the
shortcomings of the framework and notation. The third section describes several
classes of schedules. A class of schedules is typically characterized by the
freedomthe scheduler has in the decision-making process. The last section discusses
the complexity of the scheduling problems introduced in the first section.
This last section can be used, together with Appendixes D and E, to classify
scheduling problems according to their complexity.
2.1 Framework and Notation
In all the scheduling problems considered the number of jobs and the number
of machines are assumed to be finite. The number of jobs is denoted by n and
the number of machines by m. Usually, the subscript j refers to a job while the
subscript i refers to a machine. If a job requires a number of processing steps
or operations, then the pair (i, j) refers to the processing step or operation of
job j on machine i. The following pieces of data are associated with job j.
M.L. Pinedo, Scheduling, DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-78935-4 13

c Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2008
2,
14 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
Processing time (pij) The pij represents the processing time of job j on
machine i. The subscript i is omitted if the processing time of job j does not
depend on the machine or if job j is only to be processed on one given machine.
Release date (rj ) The release date rj of job j may also be referred to as
the ready date. It is the time the job arrives at the system, i.e., the earliest time
at which job j can start its processing.
Due date (dj) The due date dj of job j represents the committed shipping or
completion date (i.e., the date the job is promised to the customer). Completion
of a job after its due date is allowed, but then a penalty is incurred. When a
due date must be met it is referred to as a deadline and denoted by ¯ dj .
Weight (wj) Theweight wj of job j is basically a priority factor, denoting
the importance of job j relative to the other jobs in the system. For example,
this weight may represent the actual cost of keeping the job in the system. This
cost could be a holding or inventory cost; it also could represent the amount of
value already added to the job.
A scheduling problemis described by a triplet α | β | γ. The α field describes
the machine environment and contains just one entry. The β field provides
details of processing characteristics and constraints and may contain no entry
at all, a single entry, or multiple entries. The γ field describes the objective to
be minimized and often contains a single entry.
The possible machine environments specified in the α field are:
Single machine (1) The case of a single machine is the simplest of all possible
machine environments and is a special case of all other more complicated
machine environments.
Identical machines in parallel (Pm) There are m identical machines in
parallel. Job j requires a single operation and may be processed on any one of
the m machines or on any one that belongs to a given subset. If job j cannot
be processed on just any machine, but only on any one belonging to a specific
subset Mj, then the entry Mj appears in the β field.
Machines in parallel with different speeds (Qm) Therearem machines
in parallel with different speeds. The speed of machine i is denoted by vi. The
time pij that job j spends on machine i is equal to pj/vi (assuming job j receives
all its processing fromm achine i). This environment is referred to as uniform
machines. If all machines have the same speed, i.e., vi = 1 for all i and pij = pj ,
then the environment is identical to the previous one.
Unrelated machines in parallel (Rm) This environment is a further
generalization of the previous one. There are m different machines in parallel.
Machine i can process job j at speed vij. The tim epij that job j spends on
machine i is equal to pj/vij (again assuming job j receives all its processing
fromm achine i). If the speeds of the machines are independent of the jobs, i.e.,
vij = vi for all i and j, then the environment is identical to the previous one.
2.1 Framework and Notation 15
Flow shop (Fm) There are m machines in series. Each job has to be
processed on each one of the m machines. All jobs have to follow the same
route, i.e., they have to be processed first on machine 1, then on machine 2,
and so on. After completion on one machine a job joins the queue at the next
machine. Usually, all queues are assumed to operate under the First In First
Out (FIFO) discipline, that is, a job cannot ”pass” another while waiting in
a queue. If the FIFO discipline is in effect the flow shop is referred to as a
permutation flow shop and the β field includes the entry prmu.
Flexible flow shop (FFc) A flexible flow shop is a generalization of the flow
shop and the parallel machine environments. Instead of m machines in series
there are c stages in series with at each stage a number of identical machines in
parallel. Each job has to be processed first at stage 1, then at stage 2, and so on.
A stage functions as a bank of parallel machines; at each stage job j requires
processing on only one machine and any machine can do. The queues between
the various stages may or may not operate according to the First Come First
Served (FCFS) discipline. (Flexible flow shops have in the literature at times
also been referred to as hybrid flow shops and as multi-processor flow shops.)
Job shop (Jm) In a job shop with m machines each job has its own
predetermined route to follow. A distinction is made between job shops in which
each job visits each machine at most once and job shops in which a job may
visit each machine more than once. In the latter case the β-field contains the
entry rcrc for recirculation.
Flexible job shop (FJc) A flexible job shop is a generalization of the job
shop and the parallel machine environments. Instead of m machines in series
there are c work centers with at each work center a number of identical machines
in parallel. Each job has its own route to follow through the shop; job j requires
processing at each work center on only one machine and any machine can do.
If a job on its route through the shop may visit a work center more than once,
then the β-field contains the entry rcrc for recirculation.
Open shop (Om) There are m machines. Each job has to be processed
again on each one of the m machines. However, some of these processing times
may be zero. There are no restrictions with regard to the routing of each job
through the machine environment. The scheduler is allowed to determine a
route for each job and different jobs may have different routes.
The processing restrictions and constraints specified in the β field may include
multiple entries. Possible entries in the β field are:
Release dates (rj ) If this symbol appears in the β field, then job j cannot
start its processing before its release date rj. If rj does not appear in the β
field, the processing of job j may start at any time. In contrast to release dates,
due dates are not specified in this field. The type of objective function gives
sufficient indication whether or not there are due dates.
16 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
Preemptions (prmp) Preemptions imply that it is not necessary to keep a
job on a machine, once started, until its completion. The scheduler is allowed
to interrupt the processing of a job (preempt) at any point in time and put a
different job on the machine instead. The amount of processing a preempted job
already has received is not lost.When a preempted job is afterwards put back on
the machine (or on another machine in the case of parallel machines), it only
needs the machine for its remaining processing time. When preemptions are
allowed prmp is included in the β field; when prmp is not included, preemptions
are not allowed.
Precedence constraints (prec) Precedence constraints may appear in a
single machine or in a parallel machine environment, requiring that one or
more jobs may have to be completed before another job is allowed to start its
processing. There are several special forms of precedence constraints: if each
job has at most one predecessor and at most one successor, the constraints are
referred to as chains. If each job has at most one successor, the constraints are
referred to as an intree. If each job has at most one predecessor the constraints
are referred to as an outtree. If no prec appears in the β field, the jobs are not
subject to precedence constraints.
Sequence dependent setup times (sjk) The sjk represents the sequence
dependent setup time that is incurred between the processing of jobs j and k;
s0k denotes the setup time for job k if job k is first in the sequence and sj0 the
clean-up time after job j if job j is last in the sequence (of course, s0k and sj0
may be zero). If the setup time between jobs j and k depends on the machine,
then the subscript i is included, i.e., sijk. If no sjk appears in the β field, all
setup times are assumed to be 0 or sequence independent, in which case they
are simply included in the processing times.
Job families (fmls) The n jobs belong in this case to F different job families.
Jobs from the same family may have different processing times, but they can
be processed on a machine one after another without requiring any setup in
between. However, if the machine switches over from one family to another, say
fromfa mily g to family h, then a setup is required. If this setup time depends
on both families g and h and is sequence dependent, then it is denoted by sgh.
If this setup time depends only on the family about to start, i.e., family h,
then it is denoted by sh. If it does not depend on either family, it is denoted
by s.
Batch processing (batch(b)) A machine may be able to process a number of
jobs, say b, simultaneously; that is, it can process a batch of up to b jobs at the
same time. The processing times of the jobs in a batch may not be all the same
and the entire batch is finished only when the last job of the batch has been
completed, implying that the completion time of the entire batch is determined
by the job with the longest processing time. If b = 1, then the problemr educes to
a conventional scheduling environment. Another special case that is of interest
is b = ∞, i.e., there is no limit on the number of jobs the machine can handle
at any time.
2.1 Framework and Notation 17
Breakdowns (brkdwn) Machine breakdowns imply that a machine may not
be continuously available. The periods that a machine is not available are, in
this part of the book, assumed to be fixed (e.g., due to shifts or scheduled maintenance).
If there are a number of identical machines in parallel, the number of
machines available at any point in time is a function of time, i.e., m(t). Machine
breakdowns are at times also referred to as machine availability constraints.
Machine eligibility restrictions (Mj) The Mj symbol may appear in the
β field when the machine environment is m machines in parallel (Pm). When
the Mj is present, not all m machines are capable of processing job j. Set Mj
denotes the set of machines that can process job j. If the β field does not contain
Mj, job j m ay be processed on any one of the m machines.
Permutation (prmu) A constraint that may appear in the flow shop environment
is that the queues in front of each machine operate according to the
First In First Out (FIFO) discipline. This implies that the order (or permutation)
in which the jobs go through the first machine is maintained throughout
the system.
Blocking (block) Blocking is a phenomenon that may occur in flow shops.
If a flow shop has a limited buffer in between two successive machines, then it
may happen that when the buffer is full the upstream machine is not allowed to
release a completed job. Blocking implies that the completed job has to remain
on the upstream machine preventing (i.e., blocking) that machine from working
on the next job. The most common occurrence of blocking that is considered in
this book is the case with zero buffers in between any two successive machines.
In this case a job that has completed its processing on a given machine cannot
leave the machine if the preceding job has not yet completed its processing on
the next machine; thus, the blocked job also prevents (or blocks) the next job
from starting its processing on the given machine. In the models with blocking
that are considered in subsequent chapters the assumption is made that the
machines operate according to FIFO. That is, block implies prmu.
No-wait (nwt) The no-wait requirement is another phenomenon that may
occur in flow shops. Jobs are not allowed to wait between two successive machines.
This implies that the starting time of a job at the first machine has to
be delayed to ensure that the job can go through the flow shop without having
to wait for any machine. An example of such an operation is a steel rolling mill
in which a slab of steel is not allowed to wait as it would cool off during a wait.
It is clear that under no-wait the machines also operate according to the FIFO
discipline.
Recirculation (rcrc) Recirculation may occur in a job shop or flexible job
shop when a job may visit a machine or work center more than once.
Any other entry that may appear in the β field is self explanatory. For example,
pj = p implies that all processing times are equal and dj = d implies that
all due dates are equal. As stated before, due dates, in contrast to release dates,
are usually not explicitly specified in this field; the type of objective function
gives sufficient indication whether or not the jobs have due dates.
18 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
Uj
Lj Tj
dj
dj
dj
Cj
Cj
Cj
1
Fig. 2.1 Due date related penalty functions
The objective to be minimized is always a function of the completion times
of the jobs, which, of course, depend on the schedule. The completion time of
the operation of job j on machine i is denoted by Cij. The tim ejob j exits the
system (that is, its completion time on the last machine on which it requires
processing) is denoted by Cj . The objective may also be a function of the due
dates. The lateness of job j is defined as
Lj = Cj − dj ,
which is positive when job j is completed late and negative when it is completed
early. The tardiness of job j is defined as
Tj = m ax(Cj − dj , 0) = max(Lj, 0).
The difference between the tardiness and the lateness lies in the fact that the
tardiness never is negative. The unit penalty of job j is defined as
Uj =

1 if Cj > dj
0 otherwise
The lateness, the tardiness and the unit penalty are the three basic due date
related penalty functions considered in this book. The shape of these functions
are depicted in Figure 2.1.
Examples of possible objective functions to be minimized are:
Makespan (Cmax) The makespan, defined as max(C1, . . ., Cn), is equivalent
to the completion time of the last job to leave the system. A minimum makespan
usually implies a good utilization of the machine(s).
2.1 Framework and Notation 19
Maximum Lateness (Lmax) The maximum lateness, Lmax, is defined as
max(L1, . . ., Ln). It measures the worst violation of the due dates.
Total weighted completion time (

wjCj) The sumof the weighted
completion times of the n jobs gives an indication of the total holding or inventory
costs incurred by the schedule. The sum of the completion times is in
the literature often referred to as the flow time. The total weighted completion
time is then referred to as the weighted flow time.
Discounted total weighted completion time (

wj(1−e−rCj)) This is
a more general cost function than the previous one, where costs are discounted
at a rate of r, 0 < r < 1, per unit time. That is, if job j is not completed
by time t an additional cost wjre−rtdt is incurred over the period [t, t + dt]. If
job j is completed at time t the total cost incurred over the period [ 0, t ] is
wj(1 − e−rt). The value of r is usually close to 0, say 0.1 or 10 %.
Total weighted tardiness (

wjTj) This is also a more general cost function
than the total weighted completion time.
Weighted number of tardy jobs (

wjUj) The weighted number of tardy
jobs is not only a measure of academic interest, it is often an objective in practice
as it is a measure that can be recorded very easily.
All the objective functions above are so-called regular performance measures.
A regular performance measure is a function that is nondecreasing in
C1, . . ., Cn. Recently researchers have begun to study objective functions that
are not regular. For example, when job j has a due date dj , it may be subject
to an earliness penalty, where the earliness of job j is defined as
Ej = m ax(dj − Cj , 0).
This earliness penalty is nonincreasing in Cj . An objective such as the total
earliness plus the total tardiness, i.e.,
n
j=1
Ej +
n
j=1
Tj ,
is therefore not regular. A more general objective that is not regular is the total
weighted earliness plus the total weighted tardiness, i.e.,
n
j=1
w

jEj +
n
j=1
w

j Tj.
The weight associated with the earliness of job j (w
j) m ay be different from
the weight associated with the tardiness of job j (w
j ).
20 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
2.2 Examples
The following examples illustrate the notation:
Example 2.2.1 (A Flexible Flow Shop)
FFc | rj |

wjTj denotes a flexible flow shop. The jobs have release dates
and due dates and the objective is the minimization of the total weighted tardiness.
Example 1.1.1 in Section 1.1 (the paper bag factory) can be modeled
as such. Actually, the problemdescr ibed in Section 1.1 has some additional
characteristics including sequence dependent setup times at each of the three
stages. In addition, the processing time of job j on machine i has a special
structure: it depends on the number of bags and on the speed of the machine.
||
Example 2.2.2 (A Flexible Job Shop)
FJc | rj, sijk, rcrc | 
wjTj refers to a flexible job shop with c work centers.
The jobs have different release dates and are subject to sequence dependent
setup times that are machine dependent. There is recirculation, so a job may
visit a work center more than once. The objective is to minimize the total
weighted tardiness. It is clear that this problemis a more general problem
than the one described in the previous example. Example 1.1.2 in Section
1.1 (the semiconductor manufacturing facility) can be modeled as such. ||
Example 2.2.3 (A Parallel Machine Environment)
Pm | rj,Mj | 
wjTj denotes a systemwith m machines in parallel. Job j
arrives at release date rj and has to leave by the due date dj. Job j may be
processed only on one of the machines belonging to the subset Mj. If job j
is not completed in time a penalty wjTj is incurred. This model can be used
for the gate assignment problem described in Example 1.1.3. ||
Example 2.2.4( A Single Machine Environment)
1 | rj, prmp | 
wjCj denotes a single machine system with job j entering
the systema t its release date rj . Preemptions are allowed. The objective to
be minimized is the sum of the weighted completion times. This model can
be used to study the deterministic counterpart of the problem described in
Example 1.1.4. ||
Example 2.2.5 (Sequence Dependent Setup Times)
1 | sjk | Cmax denotes a single machine system with n jobs subject to
sequence dependent setup times, where the objective is to minimize the
makespan. It is well-known that this problem is equivalent to the so-called
Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP), where a salesman has to tour n cities
in such a way that the total distance traveled is minimized (see Appendix D
for a formal definition of the TSP). ||
2.3 Classes of Schedules 21
Example 2.2.6 (A Project)
P∞ | prec | Cmax denotes a scheduling problemwith n jobs subject to
precedence constraints and an unlimited number of machines (or resources)
in parallel. The total time of the entire project has to be minimized. This type
of problem is very common in project planning in the construction industry
and has lead to techniques such as the Critical Path Method (CPM) and the
Project Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT). ||
Example 2.2.7 (A Flow Shop)
Fm | pij = pj |

wjCj denotes a proportionate flow shop environment with
m machines in series; the processing times of job j on all m machines are
identical and equal to pj (hence the termprop ortionate). The objective is to
find the order in which the n jobs go through the systemso that the sum of
the weighted completion times is minimized. ||
Example 2.2.8 (A Job Shop)
Jm || Cmax denotes a job shop problemwith m machines. There is no recirculation,
so a job visits each machine at most once. The objective is to
minimize the makespan. This problem is considered a classic in the scheduling
literature and has received an enormous amount of attention. ||
Of course, there are many scheduling models that are not captured by this
framework. One can define, for example, a more general flexible job shop in
which each work center consists of a number of unrelated machines in parallel.
When a job on its route through the systema rrives at a bank of unrelated
machines, it may be processed on any one of the machines, but its processing
time now depends on the machine on which it is processed.
One can also define a model that is a mixture of a job shop and an open shop.
The routes of some jobs are fixed, while the routes of other jobs are (partially)
open.
The framework described in Section 2.1 has been designed primarily for models
with a single objective. Most research in the past has concentrated on models
with a single objective. Recently, researchers have begun studying models with
multiple objectives as well.
Various other scheduling features, that are not mentioned here, have been
studied and analyzed in the literature. Such features include periodic or cyclic
scheduling, personnel scheduling, and resource constrained scheduling.
2.3Classes of Schedules
In scheduling terminology a distinction is often made between a sequence, a
schedule and a scheduling policy. A sequence usually corresponds to a permutation
of the n jobs or the order in which jobs are to be processed on a given
22 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
machine. A schedule usually refers to an allocation of jobs within a more complicated
setting of machines, allowing possibly for preemptions of jobs by other
jobs that are released at later points in time. The concept of a scheduling policy
is often used in stochastic settings: a policy prescribes an appropriate action
for any one of the states the system may be in. In deterministic models usually
only sequences or schedules are of importance.
Assumptions have to be made with regard to what the scheduler may and
may not do when he generates a schedule. For example, it may be the case that
a schedule may not have any unforced idleness on any machine. This class of
schedules can be defined as follows.
Definition 2.3.1 (Non-Delay Schedule). A feasible schedule is called
non-delay if no machine is kept idle while an operation is waiting for processing.
Requiring a schedule to be non-delay is equivalent to prohibiting unforced
idleness. For many models, including those that allow preemptions and have
regular objective functions, there are optimal schedules that are non-delay. For
many models considered in this part of the book the goal is to find an optimal
schedule that is non-delay. However, there are models where it may be
advantageous to have periods of unforced idleness.
A smaller class of schedules, within the class of all non-delay schedules, is the
class of nonpreemptive non-delay schedules. Nonpreemptive non-delay schedules
may lead to some interesting and unexpected anomalies.
Example 2.3.2 (A Scheduling Anomaly)
Consider an instance of P2 | prec | Cmax with 10 jobs and the following
processing times.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
pj 8 7 7 2 3 2 2 8 8 15
The jobs are subject to the precedence constraints depicted in Figure 2.2.
The makespan of the non-delay schedule depicted in Figure 2.3.a is 31 and
the schedule is clearly optimal.
One would expect that, if each one of the ten processing times is reduced
by one time unit, the makespan would be less than 31. However, requiring
the schedule to be non-delay results in the schedule depicted in Figure 2.3.b
with a makespan of 32.
Suppose that an additional machine is made available and that there are
now three machines instead of two. One would again expect the makespan
with the original set of processing times to be less than 31. Again, the nondelay
requirement has an unexpected effect: the makespan is now 36. ||
2.3 Classes of Schedules 23
3
5
4
6 9
8
1
2
10
7
Fig. 2.2 Precedence constraints graph for Example 2.3.2.
10 20 30
(c)
0
10 20
1 2
4 5 8
6 7 9
3 10
30
(b)
0
4 6 5 7 8 3 10
1 2 9
10 20 30
(a)
0
4 6 5 7 3 10
1 2 8 9
Fig. 2.3 Gantt charts of nondelay schedules: (a) Original schedule
(b) Processing times one unit shorter (c) Original processing times and
three machines
24 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
0 2 4 6 8
2
2 1
Machine 1 1
Machine 2
Machine 3
t
Fig. 2.4 An active schedule that is not nondelay.
Some heuristic procedures and algorithms for job shops are based on the
construction of nonpreemptive schedules with certain special properties. Two
classes of nonpreemptive schedules are of importance for certain algorithmic
procedures for job shops.
Definition 2.3.3 (Active Schedule). A feasible nonpreemptive schedule
is called active if it is not possible to construct another schedule, through changes
in the order of processing on the machines, with at least one operation finishing
earlier and no operation finishing later.
In other words, a schedule is active if no operation can be put into an empty
hole earlier in the schedule while preserving feasibility. A nonpreemptive nondelay
schedule has to be active but the reverse is not necessarily true. The
following example describes a schedule that is active but not non-delay.
Example 2.3.4( An Active Schedule)
Consider a job shop with three machines and two jobs. Job 1 needs one time
unit on machine 1 and 3 time units on machine 2. Job 2 needs 2 time units
on machine 3 and 3 time units on machine 2. Both jobs have to be processed
last on machine 2. Consider the schedule which processes job 2 on machine 2
before job 1 (see Figure 2.4). It is clear that this schedule is active; reversing
the sequence of the two jobs on machine 2 postpones the processing of job 2.
However, the schedule is not non-delay. Machine 2 remains idle till time 2,
while there is already a job available for processing at time 1. ||
It can be shown that, when the objective γ is regular, there exists for Jm || γ
an optimal schedule that is active.
An even larger class of nonpreemptive schedules can be defined as follows.
Definition 2.3.5 (Semi-Active Schedule). A feasible nonpreemptive
schedule is called semi-active if no operation can be completed earlier without
changing the order of processing on any one of the machines.
It is clear that an active schedule has to be semi-active. However, the reverse
is not necessarily true.
2.3 Classes of Schedules 25
0 2 4 6 8
2
2 1
Machine 1 1
Machine 2
Machine 3
t
Fig. 2.5 A semi-active schedule that is not active.
Nondelay Active
Optimal schedule
Semiactive
All Schedules
Fig. 2.6 Venn diagram of classes of nonpreemptive schedules for job
shops
Example 2.3.6 (A Semi-Active Schedule)
Consider again a job shop with three machines and two jobs. The routing of
the two jobs is the same as in the previous example. The processing times of
job 1 on machines 1 and 2 are both equal to 1. The processing times of job 2
on machines 2 and 3 are both equal to 2. Consider the schedule under which
job 2 is processed on machine 2 before job 1 (see Figure 2.5). This implies
that job 2 starts its processing on machine 2 at time 2 and job 1 starts its
processing on machine 2 at time 4. This schedule is semi-active. However, it
is not active, as job 1 can be processed on machine 2 without delaying the
processing of job 2 on machine 2.
An example of a schedule that is not even semi-active can be constructed
easily. Postpone the start of the processing of job 1 on machine 2 for one time
unit, i.e., machine 2 is kept idle for one unit of time between the processing
of jobs 2 and 1. Clearly, this schedule is not even semi-active. ||
Figure 2.6 shows a Venn diagramof the three classes of nonpreemptive schedules:
the nonpreemptive non-delay schedules, the active schedules, and the semiactive
schedules.
26 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
2.4 Complexity Hierarchy
Often, an algorithmfo r one scheduling problem can be applied to another
scheduling problema s well. For example, 1 ||

Cj is a special case of
1 || 
wjCj and a procedure for 1 || 
wjCj can, of course, also be used
for 1 || 
Cj . In complexity terminology it is then said that 1 || 
Cj reduces
to 1 ||

wjCj . This is usually denoted by
1 || 
Cj ∝ 1 || 
wjCj .
Based on this concept a chain of reductions can be established. For example,
1 || 
Cj ∝ 1 || 
wjCj ∝ Pm || 
wjCj ∝ Qm | prec | 
wjCj .
Of course, there are also many problems that are not comparable with one
another. For example, Pm || 
wjTj is not comparable to Jm || Cmax.
A considerable effort has been made to establish a problem hierarchy describing
the relationships between the hundreds of scheduling problems. In the
comparisons between the complexities of the different scheduling problems it
is of interest to know how a change in a single element in the classification of
a problemaff ects its complexity. In Figure 2.7 a number of graphs are exhibited
that help determine the complexity hierarchy of deterministic scheduling
problems. Most of the hierarchy depicted in these graphs is relatively straightforward.
However, two of the relationships may need some explaining, namely
α | β | Lmax ∝ α | β |

Uj
and
α | β | Lmax ∝ α | β |

Tj.
It can, indeed, be shown that a procedure for α | β | 
Uj and a procedure for
α | β | 
Tj can be applied to α | β | Lmax with only minor modifications (see
Exercise 2.23).
A significant amount of research in deterministic scheduling has been devoted
to finding efficient, so-called polynomial time, algorithms for scheduling
problems. However, many scheduling problems do not have a polynomial time
algorithm; these problems are the so-called NP-hard problems. Verifying that
a problem is NP-hard requires a formal mathematical proof (see Appendix D).
Research in the past has focused in particular on the borderline between
polynomial time solvable problems and NP-hard problems. For example, in the
string of problems described above, 1 ||

wjCj can be solved in polynomial
time, whereas Pm || 
wjCj is NP-hard, which implies that Qm | prec | 
wjCj is also NP-hard. The following examples illustrate the borderlines between
easy and hard problems within given sets of problems.
Example 2.4.1 (A Complexity Hierarchy)
Consider the problems
(i) 1 || Cmax,
(ii) P2 || Cmax,
2.4 Complexity Hierarchy 27
(b)
(c)
(a)
rj
0
wjTj wjUj
Tj
Lmax
Cmax
wjCj
Cj
Uj
0 0 0
sjk prmp prec
0
brkdwn
0
Mj
0
block
0
nwt
0
recrc
Rm
Qm FFc Jm
Pm Fm
1
Om
FJc
Fig. 2.7 Complexity hierarchies of deterministic scheduling problems:
(a) Machine environments (b) Processing restrictions and constraints
(c) Objective functions
(iii) F2 || Cmax,
(iv) Jm || Cmax,
(v) FFc || Cmax.
The complexity hierarchy is depicted in Figure 2.8. ||
Example 2.4.2 (A Complexity Hierarchy)
Consider the problems
(i) 1 || Lmax,
(ii) 1 | prmp | Lmax,
(iii) 1 | rj | Lmax,
28 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
FFcCmax
P2Cmax
JmCmax
F2Cmax
Hard
Easy
1Cmax
Fig. 2.8 Complexity hierarchy of problems in Example 2.4.1
PmLmax 1rjLmax 1rj, prmpLmax
Hard 1Lmax 1prmpLmax
Easy
Fig. 2.9 Complexity hierarchy of problems in Example 2.4.2
(iv) 1 | rj, prmp | Lmax,
(v) Pm || Lmax.
The complexity hierarchy is depicted in Figure 2.9. ||
Exercises (Computational)
2.1. Consider the instance of 1 || 
wjCj with the following processing times
and weights.
jobs 1 2 3 4
wj 6 11 9 5
pj 3 5 7 4
(a) Find the optimal sequence and compute the value of the objective.
Exercises 29
(b) Give an argument for positioning jobs with larger weight more towards
the beginning of the sequence and jobs with smaller weight more towards
the end of the sequence.
(c) Give an argument for positioning jobs with smaller processing time
more towards the beginning of the sequence and jobs with larger processing
time more towards the end of the sequence.
(d) Determine which one of the following two generic rules is the most
suitable for the problem:
(i) sequence the jobs in decreasing order of wj − pj ;
(ii) sequence the jobs in decreasing order of wj/pj.
2.2. Consider the instance of 1 || Lmax with the following processing times and
due dates.
jobs 1 2 3 4
pj 5 4 3 6
dj 3 5 11 12
(a) Find the optimal sequence and compute the value of the objective.
(b) Give an argument for positioning jobs with earlier due dates more towards
the beginning of the sequence and jobs with later due dates more
towards the end of the sequence.
(c) Give an argument for positioning jobs with smaller processing time
more towards the beginning of the sequence and jobs with larger processing
time more towards the end of the sequence.
(d) Determine which one of the following four rules is the most suitable
generic rule for the problem:
(i) sequence the jobs in increasing order of dj + pj ;
(ii) sequence the jobs in increasing order of djpj ;
(iii) sequence the jobs in increasing order of dj ;
(iv) sequence the jobs in increasing order of pj.
2.3. Consider the instance of 1 || 
Uj with the following processing times and
due dates.
jobs 1 2 3 4
pj 7 6 4 8
dj 8 9 11 14
(a) Find all optimal sequences and compute the value of the objective.
30 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
(b) Formulate a generic rule based on the due dates and processing times
that yields an optimal sequence for any instance.
2.4. Consider the instance of 1 || 
Tj with the following processing times and
due dates.
jobs 1 2 3 4
pj 7 6 8 4
dj 8 9 10 14
(a) Find all optimal sequences.
(b) Formulate a generic rule that is a function of the due dates and processing
times that yields an optimal sequence for any instance.
2.5. Find the optimal sequence for P5 || Cmax with the following 11 jobs.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
pj 9 9 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 5
2.6. Consider the instance of F2 | prmu | Cmax with the following processing
times.
jobs 1 2 3 4
p1j 8 6 4 12
p2j 4 9 10 6
Find all optimal sequences and determine the makespan under an optimal sequence.
2.7. Consider the instance of F2 | block | Cmax with the same jobs and the
same processing times as in Exercise 2.6. There is no (zero) buffer between the
two machines. Find all optimal sequences and compute the makespan under an
optimal sequence.
2.8. Consider the instance of F2 | nwt | Cmax with the same jobs and the same
processing times as in Exercise 2.6. Find all optimal sequences and compute the
makespan under an optimal sequence.
2.9. Consider the instance of O2 || Cmax with 4 jobs. The processing times of
the four jobs on the two machines are again as in Exercise 2.6. Find all optimal
schedules and compute the makespan under an optimal schedule.
Exercises 31
2.10. Consider the instance of J2 || Cmax with 4 jobs. The processing times
of the four jobs on the two machines are again as in Exercise 2.6. Jobs 1 and
2 have to be processed first on machine 1 and then on machine 2, while jobs 3
and 4 have to be processed first on machine 2 and then on machine 1. Find all
optimal schedules and determine the makespan under an optimal schedule.
Exercises (Theory)
2.11. Explain why α | pj = 1, rj | γ is easier than α | prmp, rj | γ when all
processing times, release dates and due dates are integer.
2.12. Consider 1 | sjk = ak + bj | Cmax. That is, job j has two parameters
associated with it, namely aj and bj. If job j is followed by job k, there is a
setup time sjk = ak + bj required before the start of job k’s processing. The
setup tim e of the first job in the sequence, s0k is ak, while the “clean-up” time
at the completion of the last job in the sequence, sj0, is bj . Show that this
problemis equivalent to 1 || Cmax and that the makespan therefore does not
depend on the sequence. Find an expression for the makespan.
2.13. Show that 1 | sjk | Cmax is equivalent to the following Travelling
Salesman Problem: A travelling salesman starts out from city 0, visits cities
1, 2, . . . , n and returns to city 0, while minimizing the total distance travelled.
The distance from city 0 to city k is s0k; the distance fromcit y j to city k is
sjk and the distance fromci ty j to city 0 is sj0.
2.14. Show that 1 | brkdwn, prmp | 
wjCj reduces to 1 | rj, prmp | 
wjCj .
2.15. Show that 1 | pj = 1 |

wjTj and 1 | pj = 1 | Lmax are equivalent
to the assignment problem(see Appendix A for a definition of the assignment
problem).
2.16. Show that Pm | pj = 1 | 
wjTj and Pm | pj = 1 | Lmax are equivalent
to the transportation problem(see Appendix A for a definition of the
transportation problem).
2.17. Consider P || Cmax. Show that for any non-delay schedule the following
inequalities hold:

pj
m
≤ Cmax ≤ 2 × max

p1, . . . , pn,

pj
m

.
2.18. Show how Pm | Mj | γ reduces to Rm || γ.
2.19. Show that F2 | block | Cmax is equivalent to F2 | nwt | Cmax and show
that both problems are special cases of 1 | sjk | Cmax and therefore special cases
of the Travelling Salesman Problem.
32 2 Deterministic Models: Preliminaries
2.20. Consider an instance of Om | β | γ and an instance of Fm | β | γ. The
two instances have the same number of machines, the same number of jobs, and
the jobs have the same processing times on the m machines. The two instances
are completely identical with the exception that one instance is an open shop
and the other instance a flow shop. Show that the value of the objective under
the optimal sequence in the flow shop is at least as large as the value of the
objective under the optimal sequence in the open shop.
2.21. Consider O2 || Cmax. Show that
Cmax ≥ max
n
j=1
p1j ,
n
j=1
p2j

.
Find an instance of this problem where the optimal makespan is strictly larger
than the RHS.
2.22. Describe the complexity relationships between the problems
(i) 1 || 
wjCj ,
(ii) 1 | dj = d | 
wjTj ,
(iii) 1 | pj = 1 | 
wjTj ,
(iv) 1 ||

wjTj,
(v) Pm | pj = 1 | 
wjTj ,
(vi) Pm ||

wjTj .
2.23. Show that α | β | Lmax reduces to α | β | 
Tj as well as to α | β | 
Uj .
(Hint: Note that if the minimum Lmax is zero, the optimal solution with regard
to

Uj and

Tj is zero as well. It suffices to show that a polynomial time
procedure for α | β | 
Uj can be adapted easily for application to α | β | Lmax.
This can be done through a parametric analysis on the dj , i.e., solve α | β | 
Uj
with due dates dj + z and vary z.)
Comments and References
One of the first classification schemes for scheduling problems appeared in Conway,
Maxwell and Miller (1967). Lawler, Lenstra and Rinnooy Kan (1982), in
their survey paper, modified and refined this scheme extensively. Herrmann,
Lee and Snowdon (1993) made another round of extensions. The framework
presented here is another variation of the Lawler, Lenstra and Rinnooy Kan
(1982) notation, with a slightly different emphasis.
For a survey of scheduling problems subject to availability constraints
(brkdwn), see Lee (2004) For surveys on scheduling problems with non-regular
objective functions, see Raghavachari (1988) and Baker and Scudder (1990).
For a survey of scheduling problems with job families and scheduling problems
with batch processing, see Potts and Kovalyov (2000).
Comments and References 33
The definitions of non-delay, active, and semi-active schedules have been
around for a long time; see, for example, Giffler and Thompson (1960) and
French (1982) for a comprehensive overview of classes of schedules. Example
2.3.2, which illustrates some of the anomalies of non-delay schedules, is
due to Graham( 1966).
The complexity hierarchy of scheduling problems is motivated primarily by
the work of Rinnooy Kan (1976), Lenstra (1977), Lageweg, Lawler, Lenstra
and Rinnooy Kan (1981, 1982) and Lawler, Lenstra, Rinnooy Kan and Shmoys
(1993). For more on reducibility in scheduling, see Timkovsky (2000



Chapter 5
Parallel Machine Models
(Deterministic)
5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
5.2 The Makespan with Preemptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
5.3 The Total Completion Time without Preemptions . . . 130
5.4T he Total Completion Time with Preemptions . . . . . . 134
5.5 Due Date Related Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
5.6 Online Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
5.7 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 2
A bank of machines in parallel is a setting that is important from both a theoretical
and a practical point of view. Froma theoretical point of view it is
a generalization of the single machine, and a special case of the flexible flow
shop. Froma practical point of view, it is important because the occurrence of
resources in parallel is common in the real world. Also, techniques for machines
in parallel are often used in decomposition procedures for multi-stage systems.
In this chapter several objectives are considered. The three principal objectives
are the minimization of the makespan, the total completion time, and the
maximum lateness. With a single machine the makespan objective is usually
only of interest when there are sequence dependent setup times; otherwise the
makespan is equal to the sum of the processing times and is independent of
the sequence. When dealing with machines in parallel the makespan becomes
an objective of considerable interest. In practice, one often has to deal with
the problem of balancing the load on machines in parallel; by minimizing the
makespan the scheduler ensures a good balance.
One may actually consider the scheduling of parallel machines as a two step
process. First, one has to determine which jobs have to be allocated to which
machines; second, one has to determine the sequence of the jobs allocated to
each machine. With the makespan objective only the allocation process is important.
M.L. Pinedo, Scheduling, DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-78935-4 111

c Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2008
5,
112 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
With parallel machines, preemptions play a more important role than with
a single machine. With a single machine preemptions usually only play a role
when jobs are released at different points in time. In contrast, with machines
in parallel, preemptions are important even when all jobs are released at the
same time.
For most models considered in this chapter there are optimal schedules that
are non-delay. However, if there are unrelated machines in parallel and the total
completion time must be minimized without preemptions, then the optimal
schedule may not be non-delay.
Most models considered in this chapter fall in the category of the so-called
offline scheduling problems. In an offline scheduling problem all data (e.g., processing
times, release dates, due dates) are known in advance and can be taken
into account in the optimization process. In contrast, in an online scheduling
problem, the problem data are not known a priori. The processing time of a
job only becomes known the moment it is completed and a release date only
becomes known the moment a job is released. Clearly, the algorithms for online
scheduling problems tend to be quite different from the algorithms for offline
scheduling problems. The last section in this chapter focuses on online scheduling
of parallel machines.
The processing characteristics and constraints considered in this chapter include
precedence constraints as well as the set functions Mj . Throughout this
chapter it is assumed that p1 ≥ · · · ≥ pn.
5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions
First, the problem Pm || Cmax is considered. This problemis of interest because
minimizing the makespan has the effect of balancing the load over the various
machines, which is an important objective in practice.
It is easy to see that P2 || Cmax is NP-hard in the ordinary sense as it is
equivalent to PARTITION (see Appendix D). During the last couple of decades
many heuristics have been developed for Pm || Cmax. One such heuristic is
described below.
The Longest Processing Time first (LPT) rule assigns at t = 0 the m longest
jobs to the m machines. After that, whenever a machine is freed the longest
job among those not yet processed is put on the machine. This heuristic tries
to place the shorter jobs more towards the end of the schedule, where they can
be used for balancing the loads.
In the next theorema n upper bound is presented for
Cmax(LPT )
Cmax(OPT) ,
where Cmax(LPT ) denotes the makespan of the LPT schedule and Cmax(OPT)
denotes the makespan of the (possibly unknown) optimal schedule. This type
5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions 113
of worst case analysis is of interest as it gives an indication of how well the
heuristic is guaranteed to performa s well as the type of instances for which the
heuristic performs badly.
Theorem 5.1.1. For Pm || Cmax
Cmax(LPT )
Cmax(OPT)
≤ 4
3
− 1
3m
.
Proof. By contradiction. Assume that there exists one or more counterexamples
with the ratio strictly larger than 4/3−1/3m. If more than one such counterexample
exist, there must exist an example with the smallest number of jobs.
Consider this “smallest” counterexample and assume it has n jobs. This
smallest counterexample has a useful property: under LPT the shortest job is
the last job to start its processing and also the last job to finish its processing.
That this is true can be seen as follows: first, under LPT by definition
the shortest job is the last to start its processing. Also, if this job is not the
last to complete its processing, the deletion of this smallest job will result in a
counterexample with fewer jobs (the Cmax(LPT ) remains the same while the
Cmax(OPT) may remain the same or may decrease). So for the smallest counterexample
the starting time of the shortest job under LPT is Cmax(LPT )−pn.
Since at this point in time all other machines are still busy it follows that
Cmax(LPT ) − pn ≤
n−1
j=1 pj
m
.
The right hand side is an upper bound on the starting time of the shortest job.
This upper bound is achieved when scheduling the first n−1 jobs according to
LPT results in each machine having exactly the same amount of processing to
do. Now
Cmax(LPT ) ≤ pn +
n−1
j=1 pj
m
= pn(1 − 1
m
) +
n
j=1 pj
m
.
Since
Cmax(OPT) ≥
n
j=1 pj
m
the following series of inequalities holds for the counterexample:
4
3
− 1
3m
<
Cmax(LPT )
Cmax(OPT)
≤
pn(1 − 1/m) +
n
j=1 pj/m
Cmax(OPT)
= pn(1 − 1/m)
Cmax(OPT)
+
n
j=1 pj/m
Cmax(OPT)
≤ pn(1 − 1/m)
Cmax(OPT)
+ 1.
114 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
Thus
4
3
− 1
3m
<
pn(1 − 1/m)
Cmax(OPT)
+ 1
and
Cmax(OPT) < 3pn.
Note that this last inequality is a strict inequality. This implies that for the
smallest counterexample the optimal schedule may result in at most two jobs
on each machine. It can be shown that if an optimal schedule is a schedule with
at most two jobs on each machine then the LPT schedule is optimal and the ratio
of the two makespans is equal to one (see Exercise 5.11.b). This contradiction
completes the proof of the theorem. 	

Example 5.1.2 (A Worst Case Example of LPT)
Consider 4 parallel machines and 9 jobs, whose processing times are given in
the table below:
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pj 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 4
Scheduling the jobs according to LPT results in a makespan of 15. It can
be shown easily that for this set of jobs a schedule can be found with a
makespan of 12 (see Figure 5.1). This particular instance is thus a worst case
when there are 4 machines in parallel. ||
What would the worst case be, if instead of LPT an arbitrary priority rule
is used? Consider the case where at time t = 0 the jobs are put in an arbitrary
list. Whenever a machine is freed the job that ranks, among the remaining jobs,
highest on the list is put on the machine. It can be shown that the worst case
of this arbitrary list rule satisfies the inequality
Cmax(LIST )
Cmax(OPT)
≤ 2 − 1
m
.
(This result can be shown via arguments that are similar to the proof of Theorem5
.6.1 in the section on online scheduling.)
However, there are also several other heuristics for the Pm || Cmax problem
that are more sophisticated than LPT and that have tighter worst-case bounds.
These heuristics are beyond the scope of this book.
Consider now the same problem with the jobs subject to precedence constraints,
i.e., Pm | prec | Cmax. Froma complexity point of view this problem
has to be at least as hard as the problemwithout precedence constraints. To
obtain some insights into the effects of precedence constraints, a number of
special cases have to be considered. The special case with a single machine
5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions 115
0 4 8 12 16
4
3
5
6
2
1
Cmax(LPT) = 15
7
8 9
t
0 4 8 12
7 8
3
9
4
2
1
Cmax(OPT) = 12
5
6
t
Fig. 5.1 Worst case example of LPT
is clearly trivial. It is enough to keep the machine continuously busy and the
makespan will be equal to the sum of the processing times. Consider the special
case where there are an unlimited number of machines in parallel, or where
the number of machines is at least as large as the number of jobs, i.e., m ≥ n.
This problemm ay be denoted by P∞ | prec | Cmax. This is a classical problem
in the field of project planning and its study has led to the development of
the well-known Critical Path Method (CPM) and Project Evaluation and Review
Technique (PERT). The optimal schedule and the minimum makespan are
determined through a very simple algorithm.
Algorithm 5.1.3 (Minimizing the Makespan of a Project)
Schedule the jobs one at a time starting at time zero. Whenever a job has been
completed, start all jobs of which all predecessors have been completed (that
is, all schedulable jobs.) ||
That this algorithml eads to an optimal schedule can be shown easily. The
proof is left as an exercise. It turns out that in P∞ | prec | Cmax the start of
the processing of some jobs usually can be postponed without increasing the
makespan. These jobs are referred to as the slack jobs. The jobs that cannot be
postponed are referred to as the critical jobs. The set of critical jobs is referred to
116 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
1 2
4 5
6 7
8 9
3
Fig. 5.2 Precedence constraints graph with critical path in
Example 5.1.4
as the critical path(s). In order to determine the critical jobs, perform the same
procedure applied in Algorithm5. 1.3 backwards. Start at the makespan, which
is now known, and work towards time zero, while adhering to the precedence
relationships. Doing this, all jobs are completed at the latest possible completion
times and therefore started at their latest possible starting times as well. Those
jobs whose earliest possible starting times are equal to their latest possible
starting times are the critical jobs.
Example 5.1.4( Minimizing the Makespan of a Project)
Consider nine jobs with the following processing times.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
pj 4 9 3 3 6 8 8 12 6
The precedence constraints are depicted in Figure 5.2.
The earliest completion time C
j of job j can be computed easily.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
C
j 4 13 3 6 12 21 32 24 30
This implies that the makespan is 32. Assuming that the makespan is 32,
the latest possible completion times C
j can be computed.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
C
j 7 16 3 6 12 24 32 24 32
Those jobs of which the earliest possible completion times are equal to the
latest possible completion times are said to be on the critical path. So the
critical path is the chain
3 → 4 → 5 → 8 → 7.
5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions 117
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
Fig. 5.3 Intree and outtree
The critical path in this case happens to be unique. The jobs that are not
on the critical path are said to be slack. The amount of slack time for job j
is the difference between its latest possible completion time and its earliest
possible completion time. ||
In contrast to 1 | prec | Cmax and P∞ | prec | Cmax, the Pm | prec |
Cmax is strongly NP-hard when 2 ≤ m < n. Even the special case with all
processing times equal to 1, i.e., Pm | pj = 1, prec | Cmax, is not easy. However,
constraining the problemf urther and assuming that the precedence graph takes
the formof a tree (either an intree or an outtree) results in a problem, i.e.,
Pm | pj = 1, tree | Cmax, that is easily solvable. This particular problemlea ds
to a well-known scheduling rule, the Critical Path (CP) rule, which gives the
highest priority to the job at the head of the longest string of jobs in the
precedence graph (ties may be broken arbitrarily).
Before presenting the results concerning Pm | pj = 1, tree | Cmax it is
necessary to introduce some notation. Consider an intree. The single job with
no successors is called the root and is located at level 1. The jobs immediately
preceding the root are at level 2; the jobs immediately preceding the jobs at
level 2 are at level 3, and so on. In an outtree all jobs with no successors
are located at level 1. Jobs that have only jobs at level 1 as their immediate
successors are said to be at level 2; jobs that have only jobs at levels 1 and 2 as
their immediate successors are at level 3, and so on (see Figure 5.3). From this
definition it follows that the CP rule is equivalent to the Highest Level first rule.
The number of jobs at level l is denoted by N(l). Jobs with no predecessors are
referred to as starting jobs; the nodes in the graph corresponding to these jobs
are often referred to in graph theory terminology as leaves. The highest level in
the graph is denoted by lmax. Let
H(lmax + 1 − r) =
r
k=1
N(lmax + 1 − k).
118 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
Clearly, H(lmax +1−r) denotes the total number of nodes at level lmax +1−r
or higher, that is, at the highest r levels.
Theorem 5.1.5. The CP rule is optimal for Pm | pj = 1, intree | Cmax
and for Pm | pj = 1, outtree | Cmax.
Proof. The proof for intrees is slightly harder than the proof for outtrees. In
what follows only the proof for intrees is given (the proof for outtrees is left as
an exercise). In the proof for intrees a distinction has to be made between two
cases.
Case I. Assume the tree satisfies the following condition:
max
r
r
k=1 N(lmax + 1 − k)
r

≤ m.
In this case, in every time interval, all the jobs available for processing can be
processed and at most lmax time units are needed to complete all the jobs under
the CP rule. But lmax is clearly a lower bound for Cmax. So the CP rule results
in an optimal schedule.
Case II. Find for the tree the (smallest) integer c ≥ 1 such that
max
r
r
k=1 N(lmax + 1 − k)
r + c

≤ m < max
r
r
k=1 N(lmax + 1 − k)
r + c − 1

.
The c basically represents the smallest amount of time beyond time r needed
to complete all jobs at the r highest levels. Let
max
r
r
k=1 N(lmax + 1 − k)
r + c − 1

=
r
∗
k=1 N(lmax + 1 − k)
r∗ + c − 1

>m.
The number of jobs completed at time (r∗+c−1) is at most m(r∗+c−1). The
num ber of jobs at levels higher than or equal to lmax+1−r∗ is
r
∗
k=1 N(lmax+
1 − k). As
r
∗
k=1
N(lmax + 1 − k) > (r
∗ + c − 1)m
there is at least one job at a level equal to or higher than lmax + 1 − r∗ that
is not processed by time r∗ + c − 1. Starting with this job there are at least
lmax +1−r∗ time units needed to complete all the jobs. A lower bound for the
makespan under any type of scheduling rule is therefore
Cmax ≥ (r
∗ + c − 1) + (lmax + 1 − r
∗) = lmax + c.
To complete the proof it suffices to show that the CP rule results in a makespan
that is equal to this lower bound. This part of the proof is left as an exercise
(see Exercise 5.14). 	

5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions 119
1 4
2 5
3 6
Fig. 5.4 Worst case example of the CP rule for two machines
(Example 5.1.6)
The question arises: how well does the CP rule performf or arbitrary precedence
constraints when all jobs have equal processing times? It has been shown
that for two machines in parallel
Cmax(CP)
Cmax(OPT)
≤ 4
3.
When there are more than two machines in parallel, the worst case ratio is
larger. That the worst case bound for two machines can be attained is shown
in the following example.
Example 5.1.6 (A Worst-Case Example of CP)
Consider 6 jobs with unit processing times and two machines. The precedence
relationships are depicted in Figure 5.4. Jobs 4, 5 and 6 are at level 1, while
jobs 1, 2 and 3 are at level 2. As under the CP rule ties may be broken
arbitrarily, a CP schedule may prescribe at time zero to start with jobs 1
and 2. At their completion only job 3 can be started. At time 2 jobs 4 and 5
are started. Job 6 goes last and is completed by time 4. Of course, an optimal
schedule can be obtained by starting out at time zero with jobs 2 and 3. The
makespan then equals 3. ||
Example 5.1.6 shows that processing the jobs with the largest number of
successors first may result in a better schedule than processing the jobs at the
highest level first. A priority rule often used when jobs are subject to arbitrary
precedence constraints is indeed the so-called Largest Number of Successors first
(LNS) rule. Under this rule the job with the largest total number of successors
(not just the immediate successors) in the precedence constraints graph has the
highest priority. Note that in the case of intrees the CP rule and the LNS rule
are equivalent; the LNS rule therefore results in an optimal schedule in the case
of intrees. It can be shown fairly easily that the LNS rule is also optimal for
Pm | pj = 1, outtree | Cmax. The following example shows that the LNS rule
may not yield an optimal schedule with arbitrary precedence constraints.
120 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
1 2 3
4 5
6
Fig. 5.5 The LNS rule is not necessarily optimal with arbitrary
precedence constraints (Example 5.1.7)
Example 5.1.7 (Application of the LNS rule)
Consider 6 jobs with unit processing times and two machines. The precedence
constraints are depicted in Figure 5.5. The LNS rule may start at time 0 with
jobs 4 and 6. At time 1 jobs 1 and 5 start. Job 2 starts at time 2 and job
3 starts at time 3. The resulting makespan is 4. It is easy to see that the
optimal makespan is 3 and that the CP rule actually achieves the optimal
makespan. ||
Both the CP rule and the LNS rule have more generalized versions that
can be applied to problems with arbitrary job processing times. Instead of
counting the number of jobs (as in the case with unit processing times), these
more generalized versions prioritize based on the total amount of processing
remaining to be done on the jobs in question. The CP rule then gives the
highest priority to the job that is heading the string of jobs with the largest
total amount of processing (with the processing time of the job itself also being
included in this total). The generalization of the LNS rule gives the highest
priority to that job that precedes the largest total amount of processing; again
the processing time of the job itself is also included in the total. The LNS name
is clearly not appropriate for this generalization with arbitrary processing times,
as it refers to a number of jobs rather than to a total amount of processing.
Another generalization of the Pm || Cmax problemt hat is of practical interest
arises when job j is only allowed to be processed on subset Mj of the m parallel
machines. Consider Pm | pj = 1,Mj | Cmax and assume that the sets Mj are
nested, that is, one and only one of the following four conditions holds for jobs
j and k.
(i) Mj is equal to Mk (Mj = Mk)
(ii) Mj is a subset of Mk (Mj ⊂ Mk)
(iii) Mk is a subset of Mj (Mk ⊂ Mj)
(iv) Mj and Mk do not overlap (Mj ∩Mk = ∅)
5.1 The Makespan without Preemptions 121
Under these conditions a well-known dispatching rule, the Least Flexible Job
first (LFJ) rule, plays an important role. The LFJ rule selects, every time a
machine is freed, among the available jobs the job that can be processed on the
smallest number of machines, i.e., the least flexible job. Ties may be broken
arbitrarily. This rule is rather crude as it does not specify, for example, which
machine should be considered first when several machines become available at
the same time.
Theorem 5.1.8. The LFJ rule is optimal for Pm | pj = 1,Mj | Cmax
when the Mj sets are nested.
Proof. By contradiction. Suppose the LFJ rule does not yield an optimal schedule.
Consider a schedule that is optimal, and that differs from a schedule that
could have been generated via the LFJ rule. Without loss of generality, the jobs
on each machine can be ordered in increasing order of | Mj |. Now consider the
earliest time slot that is filled by a job that could not have been placed there by
the LFJ rule. Call this job job j. There exists som e job, say job j∗, that is scheduled
to start later, and that could have been scheduled by LFJ in the position
taken by job j. Note that job j∗ is less flexible than job j (since Mj ⊃ Mj∗ ).
Job j∗ cannot start before job j, since j is the earliest non-LFJ job. It cannot
start at the same time as job j, for in that case job j is in a position where
LFJ could have placed it. These two jobs, j and j∗, can be exchanged without
altering Cmax, since pj = 1 for all jobs. Note that the slot previously filled by
j is now filled by j∗, which is an LFJ position. By repeating this process of
swapping the earliest non-LFJ job, all jobs can be moved into positions where
they could have been placed using LFJ, without increasing Cmax. So it is possible
to construct an LFJ schedule froma n optimal schedule. This establishes
the contradiction. 	

It can be shown easily that the LFJ rule is optimal for P2 | pj = 1,Mj | Cmax
because with two machines the Mj sets are always nested. However, with three
or more machines the LFJ rule may not yield an optimal solution for Pm | pj =
1,Mj | Cmax with arbitrary Mj , as illustrated in the following example.
Example 5.1.9 (Application of the LFJ Rule)
Consider P4 | pj = 1,Mj | Cmax with eight jobs. The eight Mj sets are:
M1 = {1, 2}
M2 = M3 = {1, 3, 4}
M4 = {2}
M5 = M6 = M7 = M8 = {3, 4}
The Mj sets are clearly not nested. Under the LFJ rule the machines can
be considered in any order. Consider machine 1 first. The least flexible job
that can be processed on machine 1 is job 1 as it can be processed on only
122 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
two machines (jobs 2 and 3 can be processed on three machines). Consider
machine 2 next. The least flexible job to be processed on machine 2 is clearly
job 4. Least flexible jobs to be processed on machines 3 and 4 at time 0
could be jobs 5 and 6. At time 1, after jobs 1, 4, 5 and 6 have completed
their processing on the four machines, the least flexible job to be processed
on machine 1 is job 2. However, at this point none of the remaining jobs can
be processed on machine 2; so machine 2 remains idle. The least flexible jobs
to go on machines 3 and 4 are jobs 7 and 8. This implies that job 3 only can
be started at time 2, completing its processing at time 3. The makespan is
therefore equal to 3.
A better schedule with a makespan equal to 2 can be obtained by assigning
jobs 2 and 3 to machine 1; jobs 1 and 4 to machine 2; jobs 5 and 6 to machine 3
and jobs 7 and 8 to machine 4. ||
From Example 5.1.9 one may expect that, if a number of machines are free
at the same point in time, it is advantageous to consider first the least flexible
machine. The flexibility of a machine could be defined as the number of remaining
jobs that can be processed (or the total amount of processing that can
be done) on that machine. Assigning at each point in time first a job, any job,
to the Least Flexible Machine (LFM), however, does not guarantee an optimal
schedule in the case of Example 5.1.9.
Heuristics can be designed that combine the LFJ rule with the LFM rule,
giving priority to the least flexible jobs on the least flexible machines. That is,
consider at each point in time first the Least Flexible Machine (LFM) (that is,
the machine that can process the smallest number of jobs) and assign to this
machine the least flexible job that can be processed on it. Any ties may be
broken arbitrarily. This heuristic may be referred to as the LFM-LFJ heuristic.
However, in the case of Example 5.1.9 the LFM-LFJ does not yield an optimal
schedule either.
5.2 The Makespan with Preemptions
Consider the same problem as the one discussed in the beginning of the previous
section, but now with preemptions allowed, i.e., Pm | prmp | Cmax. Usually, but
not always, allowing preemptions simplifies the analysis of a problem. This is
indeed the case for this problemwher e it actually turns out thatmany schedules
are optimal. First, consider the following linear programming formulation of the
problem.
minimize Cmax
subject to
5.2 The Makespan with Preemptions 123
m
i=1
xij = pj , j = 1, . . . , n
m
i=1
xij ≤ Cmax, j = 1, . . . , n
n
j=1
xij ≤ Cmax, i = 1, . . .,m
xij ≥ 0, i = 1, . . .,m, j = 1, . . . , n.
The variable xij represents the total time job j spends on machine i. The
first set of constraints makes sure that each job receives the required amount
of processing. The second set of constraints ensures that the total amount of
processing each job receives is less than or equal to the makespan. The third
set makes sure that the total amount of processing on each machine is less
than the makespan. Since the Cmax basically is a decision variable and not an
element of the resource vector of the linear program, the second and third set
of constraints may be rewritten as follows:
Cmax −
m
i=1
xij ≥ 0, j= 1, . . . , n
Cmax −
n
j=1
xij ≥ 0, i= 1, . . . , m
Example 5.2.1 (LP Formulation for Minimizing Makespan with
Preemptions)
Consider two machines and three jobs with p1 = 8, p2 = 7 and p3 = 5.
There are thus 7 variables, namely x11, x21, x12, x22, x13, x23 and Cmax
(see Appendix A). The A matrix is a matrix of 0’s and 1’s. The ¯c vector
contains six 0’s and a single 1. The ¯b vector contains the three processing
times and five 0’s. ||
This LP can be solved in polynomial time, but the solution of the LP does
not prescribe an actual schedule; it merely specifies the amount of time job
j should spend on machine i. However, with this information a schedule can
easily be constructed.
There are several other algorithms for Pm | prmp | Cmax. One of these
algorithms is based on the fact that it is easy to obtain an expression for the
makespan under the optimal schedule. In the next lemma a lower bound is
established.
124 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
Lemma 5.2.2. Under the optimal schedule for Pm | prmp | Cmax
Cmax ≥ max

p1,
n
j=1
pj/m

= C
∗
max.
Proof. Recall that job 1 is the job with the longest processing time. The proof
is easy and left as an exercise. 	

Having a lower bound allows for the construction of a very simple algorithm
that minimizes the makespan. The fact that this algorithm actually produces
a schedule with a makespan that is equal to the lower bound shows that the
algorithmyi elds an optimal schedule.
Algorithm 5.2.3 (Minimizing Makespan with Preemptions)
Step 1.
Take the n jobs and process them one after another on a single machine
in any sequence. The makespan is then equal to the sum of the n
processing times and is less than or equal to mC∗
max.
Step 2.
Take this single machine schedule and cut it into m parts. The first part
constitutes the interval [ 0, C∗
max ] , the second part the interval
[ C∗
max, 2C∗
max ] , the third part the interval [ 2C∗
max, 3C∗
max ] , etc.
Step 3.
Take as the schedule for machine 1 in the bank of parallel machines
the processing sequence of the first interval; take as the schedule for
machine 2 the processing sequence of the second interval, and so on. ||
It is obvious that the resulting schedule is feasible. Part of a job may appear
at the end of the schedule for machine i, while the remaining part may appear
at the beginning of the schedule for machine i + 1. As preemptions are allowed
and the processing time of each job is less than C∗
max such a schedule is feasible.
As this schedule has Cmax = C∗
max, it is also optimal.
Another schedule that may appear appealing for Pm | prmp | Cmax is the
Longest Remaining Processing Time first (LRPT) schedule. This schedule is the
preemptive counterpart of the (nonpreemptive) LPT schedule. It is a schedule
that is structurally appealing, but mainly of academic interest. From a theoretical
point of view it is important because of similarities with optimal policies in
stochastic scheduling (see Chapter 12). Froma practical point of view it has a
serious drawback. The number of preemptions needed in the deterministic case
is usually infinite.
Example 5.2.4( Application of the LRPT Rule)
Consider 2 jobs with unit processing times and a single machine. Under
LRPT the two jobs continuously have to rotate and wait for their next turn
5.2 The Makespan with Preemptions 125
on the machine (that is, a job stays on the machine for a time period 4
and after every time period 4 the job waiting preempts the machine). The
makespan is equal to 2 and is, of course, independent of the schedule. But
note that the sum of the two completion times under LRPT is 4, while under
the nonpreemptive schedule it is 3. ||
In the subsequent lemma and theorem a proof technique is used that is
based on a discrete time framework. All processing times are assumed to be
integer and the decision-maker is allowed to preempt any machine only at integer
times 1, 2, . . . The proof that LRPT is optimal is based on a dynamic
programming induction technique that requires some special notation. Assume
that at some integer time t the remaining processing times of the n jobs are
p1(t), p2(t), . . . , pn(t). Let ¯p(t) denote this vector of processing times. In the
proof two different vectors of remaining processing times at time t, say ¯p(t)
and ¯q(t), are repeatedly compared to one another. The vector ¯p(t) is said to
majorize the vector ¯q(t), ¯p(t) ≥m ¯q(t), if
k
j=1
p(j)(t) ≥
k
j=1
q(j)(t),
for all k = 1, . . . , n, where p(j)(t) denotes the jth largest element of vector
¯p(t) and q(j)(t) denotes the jth largest element of vector ¯q(t).
Example 5.2.5 (Vector Majorization)
Consider the two vectors ¯p(t) = (4,8,2,4) and ¯q(t) = (3,0,6,6). Rearranging
the elements within each vector and putting these in decreasing order results
in vectors (8,4,4,2) and (6,6,3,0). It can be verified easily that ¯p(t) ≥m ¯q(t).
||
Lemma 5.2.6. If ¯p(t) >m ¯q(t) then LRPT applied to ¯p(t) results in a
makespan that is larger than or equal to the makespan obtained by applying
LRPT to ¯q(t).
Proof. The proof is by induction on the total amount of remaining processing.
In order to show that the lemma holds for ¯p(t) and ¯q(t), with total remaining
processing time
n
j=1 pj(t) and
n
j=1 qj(t) respectively, assume as induction
hypothesis that the lemma holds for all pairs of vectors with total remaining
processing less than or equal to
n
j=1 pj(t) − 1 and
n
j=1 qj(t) − 1 respectively.
The induction base can be checked easily by considering the two vectors
1, 0, . . . ,0 and 1, 0, . . . , 0.
If LRPT is applied for one time unit on ¯p(t) and ¯q(t), respectively, then the
vectors of remaining processing times at time t + 1 are ¯p(t + 1) and ¯q(t + 1),
respectively. Clearly,
n
j=1
p(j)(t + 1) ≤
n
j=1
p(j)(t) − 1
126 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
and
n
j=1
q(j)(t + 1) ≤
n
j=1
q(j)(t) − 1.
It can be shown that if ¯p(t) ≥m ¯q(t), then ¯p(t + 1) ≥m ¯q(t + 1). So if LRPT
results in a larger makespan at time t + 1 because of the induction hypothesis,
it also results in a larger makespan at time t.
It is clear that if there are less than m jobs remaining to be processed, the
lemma holds. 	

Theorem 5.2.7. LRPT yields an optimal schedule for Pm | prmp | Cmax
in discrete time.
Proof. The proof is based on induction as well as on contradiction arguments.
The first step of the induction is shown as follows. Suppose not more than
m jobs have processing times remaining and that these jobs all have only one
unit of processing time left. Then clearly LRPT is optimal.
Assume LRPT is optimal for any vector ¯p(t) for which
n
j=1
p(j)(t) ≤ N − 1.
Consider now a vector ¯p(t) for which
n
j=1
p(j)(t) = N.
The induction is based on the total amount of remaining processing, N −1, and
not on the time t.
In order to show that LRPT is optimal for a vector of remaining processing
times ¯p(t) with a total amount of remaining processing
n
j=1 pj(t) = N, assume
that LRPT is optimal for all vectors with a smaller total amount of remaining
processing. The proof of the induction step, showing that LRPT is optimal for
¯p(t), is by contradiction. If LRPT is not optimal, another rule has to be optimal.
This other rule does not act according to LRPT at time t, but fromtim e t +1
onwards it must act according to LRPT because of the induction hypothesis
(LRPT is optimal from t + 1 on as the total amount of processing remaining
at time t + 1 is strictly less than N). Call this supposedly optimal rule, which
between t and t + 1 does not act according to LRPT, LRPT. Now applying
LRPT at time t on ¯p(t) must be compared to applying LRPT at time t on
the sam e vector ¯p(t). Let ¯p(t+1) and ¯p(t+1) denote the vectors of remaining
processing times at time t+1 after applying LRPT and LRPT. It is clear that
¯p(t + 1) ≥m ¯p(t + 1). From Lemma 5.2.6 it follows that the makespan under
LRPT is larger than the makespan under LRPT. This completes the proof of
the induction step and the proof of the theorem. 	

5.2 The Makespan with Preemptions 127
0 5 10
2 3
1
2 1 3
3 2 1
t
Fig. 5.6 LRPT with three jobs on two machines with preemptions
allowed at integer points in time (Example 5.2.8)
0 5 10
2 2, 3
1
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3
t
Fig. 5.7 LRPT with three jobs on two machines with preemptions
allowed at any time (Example 5.2.9)
Example 5.2.8 (Application of LRPT in Discrete Time)
Consider two machines and three jobs, say jobs 1, 2 and 3, with processing
times 8, 7 and 6. The schedule under LRPT is depicted in Figure 5.6 and
the makespan is 11. ||
That LRPT is also optimal in continuous time (resulting in an infinite number
of preemptions) can be argued easily. Multiply all processing times by K,
K being a very large integer. The problemin trinsically does not change, as the
relative lengths of the processing times remain the same. The optimal policy is,
of course, again LRPT. But now there may be many more preemptions (recall
preemptions must occur at integral time units). Basically, multiplying all processing
times by K has the effect that the time slots become smaller relative to
the processing times and the decision-maker is allowed to preempt after shorter
intervals. Letting K go to ∞ shows that LRPT is optimal in continuous time
as well.
Example 5.2.9 (Application of LRPT in Continuous Time)
Consider the same jobs as in the previous example. As preemptions may be
done at any point in time, processor sharing takes place, see Figure 5.7. The
makespan is now 10.5. ||
Consider the generalization to uniformm achines, that is, m machines in
parallel with machine i having speed vi. Without loss of generality it may be
assumed that v1 ≥ v2 ≥ · · · ≥ vm. Similar to Lemma 5.2.2 a lower bound can
be established for the makespan here as well.
128 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
Lemma 5.2.10. Under the optimal schedule for Qm | prmp | Cmax
Cmax ≥ max
 p1
v1
,
p1 + p2
v1 + v2
, . . . ,
m−1
j=1 pj m−1
i=1 vi
,
n
j=1 pj m
i=1 vi

Proof. The makespan has to be at least as large as the time it takes for the
fastest machine to do the longest job. This time represents the first term within
the “max” on the R.H.S. The makespan also has to be at least as large as the
time needed for the fastest and second fastest machine to process the longest
and second longest job while keeping the two machines occupied exactly the
same amount of time. This amount of time represents the second term within
the “max” expression. The remainder of the first m−1 terms are determined in
the same way. The last term is a bit different as it is the minimum time needed
to process all n jobs on the m machines while keeping all the m machines
occupied exactly the same amount of time. 	

If the largest termin the lower bound is determined by the sumo f the
processing times of the k longest jobs divided by the sumof the speeds of the
k fastest machines, then the n − k smallest jobs under the optimal schedule do
not receive any processing on the k fastest machines; these jobs only receive
processing on the m − k slowest machines.
Example 5.2.11 (Minimizing Makespan on Uniform Machines)
Consider three machines, 1, 2 and 3, with respective speeds 3, 2 and 1. There
are three jobs, 1, 2 and 3, with respective processing times 36, 34 and 12. The
optimal schedule assigns the two longest jobs to the two fastest machines.
Job 1 is processed for 8 units of time on machine 1 and for 6 units of time
on machine 2, while job 2 is processed for 8 units of time on machine 2 and
for 6 units of time on machine 1. These two jobs are completed after 14 time
units. Job 3 is processed only on machine 3 and is completed at time 12. ||
A generalization of the LRPT schedule described before is the so-called
Longest Remaining Processing Time on the Fastest Machine first (LRPT-FM)
rule. This rule assigns, at any point in time, the job with the longest remaining
processing time to the fastest machine; the job with the second longest
remaining processing time to the second fastest machine, and so on.
This rule typically requires an infinite number of preemptions. If at time t
two jobs have the same remaining processing time and this processing time is
the longest among the jobs not yet completed by time t, then one of the two
jobs has to go on the fastest machine while the other has to go on the second
fastest. At time t + 4, 4 being very small, the remaining processing time of the
job on the second fastest machine is longer than the remaining processing time
of the job on the fastest machine. So the job on the second fastest machine has
to move to the fastest and vice versa. Thus the LRPT-FM rule often results in
so-called processor sharing. A number of machines, say m∗, process a number
5.2 The Makespan with Preemptions 129
of jobs, say n∗, n∗ ≥ m∗; the machines allocate their total processing capability
uniformly over the n∗ jobs and ensure that the remaining processing times of
the n∗ jobs remain equal at all times.
It can be shown that the LRPT-FM rule is indeed optimal for Qm | prmp |
Cmax. It is again easier to construct first a proof of optimality in a discrete time
framework and then extend the result to a continuous time setting. Assume
that the processing times as well as the speeds are integers. Replace the original
machine i that operates at speed vi by vi identical, so-called unit-speed, machines
that operate at speed 1. A job may be processed for one time unit on a subset of
the unit-speed machines that correspond to machine i. (It may not be processed
at the same point in time by two unit-speed machines that do not correspond
to the same original machine.)
Assume that preemptions are only allowed at integer times 1, 2, 3, . . . If
at time t job j has a remaining processing time pj , its remaining processing
time at time t + 1 is equal to (pj − l) after being processed for one time unit
on l unit-speed machines corresponding to the original machine i. Lemma 5.2.6
can be shown for this framework as well. Based on this lemma the following
theoremcan be shown.
Theorem 5.2.12. LRPT-FM yields an optimal schedule for Qm | prmp |
Cmax in discrete time.
Example 5.2.13 (Application of the LRPT-FM Rule)
Consider again 2 machines and three jobs. The processing times of the three
jobs are again 8, 7 and 6. The two machines have now different speeds: v1 = 2
and v2 = 1. The first machine can be replaced by two machines with speed 1.
Note that a job may be processed simultaneously by machines 1 and 2, but
not simultaneously by machines 1 and 3 or 2 and 3. These three machines may
be scheduled as follows: Job 1 is assigned to the first two unit-speed machines
for one time unit and job 2 is assigned to the third unit-speed machine for
one time unit. At time 1, all three jobs have a remaining processing time
equal to 6. So from time 1 on, each job occupies one unit-speed machine and
the makespan is equal to 7. ||
In order to show that LRPT-FM is also optimal in continuous time two
limits have to be taken. First, all the processing times have to be multiplied
by a large number K. In proportion to the new processing times a time unit
is now very small. The possible number of preemptions goes up significantly
this way, approaching preemptions in continuous time. Second, the speeds of
the machines have to be multiplied with a large number as well. Thus the
number of unit-speed machines for each original machine goes up dramatically.
This implies that a finer partitioning of the processing capabilities of a given
machine can be realized. Through such arguments it can be shown that LRPTFM
is optimal in continuous time. In addition, it can be shown that applying
LRPT-FM to the available jobs when the jobs have different release dates is
optimal as well (i.e., Qm | rj, prmp | Cmax).
130 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
5.3The Total Completion Time without Preemptions
Consider m machines in parallel and n jobs. Recall that p1 ≥ · · · ≥ pn. The
objective to be minimized is the total unweighted completion time

Cj. From
Theorem3. 1.1 it follows that for a single machine the Shortest Processing Time
first (SPT) rule minimizes the total completion time. This single machine result
can also be shown in a different way fairly easily.
Let p(j) denote the processing time of the job in the jth position in the
sequence. The total completion time can then be expressed as

Cj = np(1) + (n − 1)p(2) + · · · + 2p(n−1) + p(n).
This implies that there are n coefficients n, n − 1, . . . , 1 to be assigned to n
different processing times. The processing times have to be assigned in such a
way that the sum of the products is minimized. From the elementary Hardy,
Littlewood and Polya inequality as well as common sense it follows that the
highest coefficient, n, is assigned the smallest processing time, pn, the second
highest coefficient, n−1, is assigned the second smallest processing time, pn−1,
and so on. This implies that SPT is optimal.
This type of argument can be extended to the parallel machine setting as
well.
Theorem 5.3.1. The SPT rule is optimal for Pm || 
Cj .
Proof. In the case of parallel machines there are nm coefficients to which processing
times can be assigned. These coefficients are m ns, m (n−1)s, . . . , m
ones. The processing times have to be assigned to a subset of these coefficients
in order to minimize the sum of the products. Assume that n/m is an integer. If
it is not an integer add a number of dummy jobs with zero processing times so
that n/m is integer (adding jobs with zero processing times does not change the
problem; these jobs would be instantaneously processed at time zero and would
not contribute to the objective function). It is easy to see, in a similar manner
as above, that the set of m longest processing times have to be assigned to the
m ones, the set of second m longest processing times have to be assigned to
the m twos, and so on. This results in the m longest jobs each being processed
on different machines and so on. That this class of schedules includes SPT can
be shown as follows. According to the SPT schedule the smallest job has to go
on machine 1 at time zero, the second smallest one on machine 2, and so on;
the (m+1)th smallest job follows the smallest job on machine 1, the (m+2)th
smallest job follows the second smallest on machine 2, and so on. It is easy to
verify that the SPT schedule corresponds to an optimal assignment of jobs to
coefficients. 	

Fromthe proof of the theoremit is clear that the SPT schedule is not the
only schedule that is optimal. Many more schedules also minimize the total
completion time. The class of schedules that minimize the total completion
time turns out to be fairly easy to characterize (see Exercise 5.21).
5.3 The Total Completion Time without Preemptions 131
As pointed out in the previous chapter the more general WSPT rule minimizes
the total weighted completion time in the case of a single machine. Unfortunately,
this result cannot be generalized to parallel machines, as shown in
the following example.
Example 5.3.2 (Application of the WSPT Rule)
Consider two machines and three jobs.
jobs 1 2 3
pj 1 1 3
wj 1 1 3
Scheduling jobs 1 and 2 at time zero and job 3 at time 1 results in a total
weighted completion time of 14, while scheduling job 3 at time zero and jobs
1 and 2 on the other machine results in a total weighted completion time
of 12. Clearly, with this set of data any schedule may be considered to be
WSPT. However, making the weights of jobs 1 and 2 equal to 1 − 4 shows
that WSPT does not necessarily yield an optimal schedule. ||
It has been shown in the literature that the WSPT heuristic is nevertheless a
very good heuristic for the total weighted completion time on parallel machines.
A worst case analysis of this heuristic yields the lower bound

wjCj(WSPT )
wjCj(OPT) <
1
2
(1 +
√
2).
What happens now in the case of precedence constraints? The problem
Pm | prec | 
Cj is known to be strongly NP-hard in the case of arbitrary
precedence constraints. However, the special case with all processing times equal
to 1 and precedence constraints that take the formof an outtree can be solved
in polynomial time. In this special case the Critical Path rule again minimizes
the total completion time.
Theorem 5.3.3. The CP rule is optimal for Pm | pj = 1, outtree | 
Cj .
Proof. Up to some integer point in time, say t1, the number of schedulable jobs
is less than or equal to the number of machines. Under the optimal schedule, at
each point in time before t1, all schedulable jobs have to be put on the machines.
Such actions are in accordance with the CP rule. Time t1 is the first point in
time when the number of schedulable jobs is strictly larger than m. There are
at least m+ 1 jobs available for processing and each one of these jobs is at the
head of a subtree that includes a string of a given length.
The proof that applying CP from t1 is optimal is by contradiction. Suppose
that after time t1 another rule is optimal. This rule must, at least once, prescribe
132 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
an action that is not according to CP. Consider the last point in time, say t2, at
which this rule prescribes an action not according to CP. So at t2 there are m
jobs, that are not heading the m longest strings, assigned to the m machines;
from t2 + 1 the CP rule is applied. Call the schedule from t2 onwards CP. It
suffices to show that applying CP from t2 onwards results in a schedule that is
at least as good.
Consider under CP the longest string headed by a job that is not assigned
at t2, say string 1, and the shortest string headed by a job that is assigned at
t2, say string 2. The job at the head of string 1 has to start its processing under
CP at time t2 +1. Let C
1 and C
2 denote the completion times of the last jobs
of strings 1 and 2, respectively, under CP. Under CP C
1
≥ C
2. It is clear that
under CP all m machines have to be busy at least up to C
2
−1. If C
1
≥ C
2 +1
and there are machines idle before C
1
− 1, the application of CP at t2 results
in less idle time and a smaller total completion time. Under CP the last job of
string 1 is completed one time unit earlier, yielding one more completed job at
or before C
1
− 1. In other cases the total completion time under CP is equal
to the total completion time under CP. This implies that CP is optimal from
t2 on. As there is not then a last time for a deviation from CP, the CP rule is
optimal. 	

In contrast to the makespan objective the CP rule is, somewhat surprisingly,
not necessarily optimal for intrees. Counterexamples can be found easily (see
Exercise 5.24).
Consider the problem Pm | pj = 1,Mj | 
Cj . Again, if the Mj sets are
nested the Least Flexible Job first rule can be shown to be optimal.
Theorem 5.3.4. The LFJ rule is optimal for Pm | pj = 1,Mj |

Cj
when the Mj sets are nested.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 5.1.8. 	

The previous model is a special case of Rm || 
Cj . As stated in Chapter 2,
the machines in the Rm environment are entirely unrelated. That is, machine
1 may be able to process job 1 in a short time and may need a long time for
job 2, while machine 2 may be able to process job 2 in a short time and may
need a long time for job 1. That the Qm environment is a special case is clear.
Identical machines in parallel with job j being restricted to machine set Mj is
also a special case; the processing time of job j on a machine that is not part
of Mj has to be considered very long making it therefore impossible to process
the job on such a machine.
The Rm || 
Cj problemcan be formulated as an integer program with
a special structure that makes it possible to solve the problem in polynomial
time. Recall that if job j is processed on machine i and there are k − 1 jobs
following job j on this machine i, then job j contributes kpij to the value of
the objective function. Let xikj denote 0 − 1 integer variables, where xikj = 1
5.3 The Total Completion Time without Preemptions 133
if job j is scheduled as the kth to last job on machine i and 0 otherwise. The
integer programi s then formulated as follows:
minimize
m
i=1
n
j=1
n
k=1
kpijxikj
subject to
m
i=1
n
k=1
xikj = 1, j = 1, . . . , n
n
j=1
xikj ≤ 1, i = 1, . . .,m, k = 1, . . . , n
xikj ∈ {0, 1}, i = 1, . . .,m, k = 1, . . . , n j = 1, . . . , n
The constraints make sure that each job is scheduled exactly once and each
position on each machine is taken by at most one job. Note that the processing
times only appear in the objective function.
This is a so-called weighted bipartite matching problem with on one side the
n jobs and on the other side nm positions (each machine can process at most n
jobs). If job j is matched with (assigned to) position ik there is a cost kpij. The
objective is to determine the matching in this so-called bipartite graph with
a minimum total cost. It is known from the theory of network flows that the
integrality constraints on the xikj may be replaced by nonnegativity constraints
without changing the feasible set. This weighted bipartite matching problem
then reduces to a regular linear program for which there exist polynomial time
algorithms. (see Appendix A).
Note that the optimal schedule does not have to be a non-delay schedule.
Example 5.3.5 (Minimizing Total Completion Time with Unrelated
Machines)
Consider 2 machines and 3 jobs. The processing times of the three jobs on
the two machines are presented in the table below.
jobs 1 2 3
p1j 4 5 3
p2j 8 9 3
The bipartite graph associated with this problemi s depicted in Figure 5.8.
According to the optimal schedule machine 1 processes job 1 first and
job 2 second. Machine 2 processes job 3. This solution corresponds to
134 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
p11
p12
2p11
2p12 3p12
2p22
2p13
3p13
2p23 3p23
3p22
2p21
3p11
3p21
p11
1 2
p22
p13
p23
3
1, 1 1, 2 1, 3 2, 1 2, 2 2, 3
Job j
Position
i, k
Fig. 5.8 Bipartite graph for Rm || 
Cj with three jobs
x121 = x112 = x213 = 1 and all other xikj equal to zero. This optimal
schedule is not non-delay (machine 2 is freed at time 3 and the waiting job
is not put on the machine). ||
5.4 The Total Completion Time with Preemptions
In Theorem 5.3.1 it is shown that the nonpreemptive SPT rule minimizes

Cj
in a parallel machine environment. It turns out that the nonpreemptive SPT
rule is also optimal when preemptions are allowed. This result is a special case
of the more general result described below.
Consider m machines in parallel with different speeds, i.e., Qm | prmp | 
Cj . This problemlea ds to the so-called Shortest Remaining Processing Time
on the Fastest Machine (SRPT-FM) rule. According to this rule at any point
in time the job with the shortest remaining processing time is assigned to the
fastest machine, the second shortest remaining processing time on the second
fastest machine, and so on. Clearly, this rule requires preemptions. Every time
the fastest machine completes a job, the job on the second fastest machine
moves to the fastest machine, the job on the third fastest machine moves to the
second fastest machine, and so on. So, at the first job completion there are m−1
preemptions, at the second job completion there are m − 1 preemptions, and
so on until the number of remaining jobs is less than the number of machines.
From that point in time the number of preemptions is equal to the number of
remaining jobs.
The following lemma is needed for the proof.
Lemma 5.4.1. There exists an optimal schedule under which Cj ≤ Ck
when pj ≤ pk for all j and k.
Proof. The proof is left as an exercise. 	

Without loss of generality it may be assumed that there are as many machines
as jobs. If the number of jobs is smaller than the number of machines then the
5.4 The Total Completion Time with Preemptions 135
m − n slowest machines are disregarded. If the number of jobs is larger than
the number of machines, then n − m machines are added with zero speeds.
Theorem 5.4.2. The SRPT-FM rule is optimal for Qm | prmp | 
Cj .
Proof. Under SRPT-FM Cn ≤ Cn−1 ≤ · · · ≤ C1. It is clear that under SRPTFM
the following equations have to be satisfied:
v1Cn = pn
v2Cn + v1(Cn−1 − Cn) = pn−1
v3Cn + v2(Cn−1 − Cn) + v1(Cn−2 − Cn−1) = pn−2
...
vnCn + vn−1(Cn−1 − Cn) + · · · + v1(C1 − C2) = p1
Adding these equations yields the following set of equations.
v1Cn = pn
v2Cn + v1Cn−1 = pn + pn−1
v3Cn + v2Cn−1 + v1Cn−2 = pn + pn−1 + pn−2
...
vnCn + vn−1Cn−1 + · · · + v1C1 = pn + pn−1 + · · · + p1
Suppose schedule S is optimal. From the previous lemma it follows that
C

n
≤ C

n−1
≤ · · · ≤ C

1.
The shortest job cannot be completed before pn/v1, i.e., C
n
≥ pn/v1 or
v1C

n
≥ pn.
Given that jobs n and n − 1 are completed at C
n and C
n−1,
(v1 + v2)C

n + v1(C

n−1
− C

n)
is an upper bound on the amount of processing that can be done on these two
jobs. This implies that
v2C

n + v1C

n−1
≥ pn + pn−1.
Continuing in this manner it is easy to show that
vkC

n + vk−1C

n−1 + · · · + v1C

n−k+1
≥ pn + pn−1 + · · · + pn−k+1.
136 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
So
v1C

n
≥ v1Cn
v2C

n + v1C

n−1
≥ v2Cn + v1Cn−1
...
vnC

n + vn−1C

n−1 + · · · + v1C

1
≥ vnCn + vn−1Cn−1 + · · · + v1C1
If a collection of positive numbers αj can be found, such that multiplying the jth
inequality by αj and adding all inequalities yields the inequality

C
j
≥ 
Cj ,
then the proof is complete. It can be shown that these αj must satisfy the
equations
v1α1 + v2α2 + · · · + vnαn = 1
v1α2 + v2α3 + · · · + vn−1αn = 1
...
v1αn = 1
As v1 ≥ v2 ≥ · · · ≥ vn such a collection does exist. 	

Example 5.4.3 (Application of the SRPT-FM Rule)
Consider 4 machines and 7 jobs. The machine data and job data are contained
in the two tables below.
machines 1 2 3 4
vi 4 2 2 1
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
pj 8 16 34 40 45 46 61
Assuming that preemptions are allowed only at integer points in time, the
SRPT-FM rule results in the schedule depicted in Figure 5.9. Under this
optimal schedule the total completion time is 116. ||
5.5 Due Date Related Objectives
Single machine problems with due date related objectives that are solvable in
polynomial time typically have the maximum lateness as objective, e.g., 1 ||
Lmax, 1 | prmp | Lmax and 1 | rj, prmp | Lmax. Single machine problems with
5.5 Due Date Related Objectives 137
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
4 5
3 4
2 3
1
Machine 4
Machine 3
Machine 2
Machine 1
C1 = 2 C1 = 5 C3 = 11 C4 = 16 C5 = 21 C6 = 26 C7 = 35
2
6
5
4
3
7
6
5
4
7
6
5
7
6 7
t
Fig. 5.9 The SRPT-FM schedule (Example 5.4.3)
the total tardiness or the total weighted tardiness as objective tend to be very
hard.
It is easy to see that froma complexity point of view Pm || Lmax is not
as easy as 1 || Lmax. Consider the special case where all jobs have due date 0.
Finding a schedule with a minimum Lmax is equivalent to Pm || Cmax and is
therefore NP-hard.
Consider Qm | prmp | Lmax. This problemis one of the few parallel machine
scheduling problems with a due date related objective that is solvable in polynomial
time. Suppose one has to verify whether there exists a feasible schedule
with Lmax = z. This implies that for job j the completion time Cj has to be
less than or equal to dj + z. Let dj + z be a hard deadline ¯ dj . Finding a feasible
schedule with all jobs completing their processing before these deadlines is
equivalent to solving the problem Qm | rj, prmp | Cmax. In order to see this,
reverse the direction of time in the due date problem. Apply the LRPT-FM
rule starting with the last deadline and work backwards. The deadlines in the
original problemp lay the role of the release dates in the reversed problem that
is then equivalent to Qm | rj, prmp | Cmax. If applying the LRPT-FM rule
backwards results in a feasible schedule with all the jobs in the original problemst
arting at a time larger than or equal to zero, then there exists a schedule
for Qm | prmp | Lmax with Lmax ≤ z. In order to find the minimum Lmax a
simple search has to be done to determine the appropriate minimum value of z.
Example 5.5.1 (Minimizing Maximum Lateness with Preemptions)
Consider the following instance of P2 | prmp | Lmax with 4 jobs. The processing
times and due dates are given in the table below. Preemptions are
allowed at integer points in time.
jobs 1 2 3 4
dj 4 5 8 9
pj 3 3 3 8
138 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
First, it has to be checked whether there exists a feasible solution with
Lmax = 0. The data of the instance created through time reversal are determined
as follows. The release dates are obtained by determining the maximum
due date in the original problem which is 9 and corresponds to job
4; the release date of job 4 in the new problemis then set equal to 0. The
release dates of the remaining jobs are obtained by subtracting the original
due dates from9 .
jobs 1 2 3 4
rj 5 4 1 0
pj 3 3 3 8
The question now is: in this new instance can a schedule be created with a
makespan less than 9? Applying LRPT immediately yields a feasible schedule.
||
Consider now Qm | rj, prmp | Lmax. Again a parametric study can be done.
First an attempt is made to find a schedule with Lmax equal to z. Due date
dj is replaced by a deadline dj + z. Reversing this problemdo es not provide
any additional insight as it results in a problemof the same type with release
dates and due dates reversed. However, this problemstill can be formulated as
a network flow problem that is solvable in polynomial time.
5.6 Online Scheduling
In all previous sections the underlying assumptions were based on the fact
that all the problemda ta (e.g., number of jobs, processing times, release dates,
due dates, weights, and so on) are known in advance. The decision-maker can
determine at time zero the entire schedule while having all the information
at his disposal. This most common paradigm is usually referred to as offline
scheduling.
One category of parallel machine scheduling problems that has not yet been
addressed in this chapter are the so-called online scheduling problems. In an
online scheduling problemthe decision-maker does not know in advance how
many jobs have to be processed and what the processing times are. The decisionmaker
becomes aware of the existence of a job only when the job is released
and presented to him. Jobs that are released at the same point in time are
presented to the decision-maker one after another. The decision-maker only
knows the number of jobs released at that point in time after the last one has
been presented to him. The processing time of a job becomes known only when
the job has been completed. If the assumption is made that jobs are going to
be released at different points in time, then the decision-maker does not know
at any given point in time how many jobs are still going to be released and
5.6 Online Scheduling 139
what their release dates are going to be. (In an offline scheduling problemal l
information regarding all n jobs is known a priori.)
An online counterpart of Pm || γ can be described as follows. The jobs are
going to be presented to the decision-maker one after another going down a
list. The decision-maker only knows how long the list is when the end of the list
has been reached. When a job has been presented to the decision-maker (or,
equivalently, when the decision-maker has taken a job from the list), he may
have to wait till one (or more) machines have become idle before he assigns the
job to a machine. After he has assigned the job to a machine, the decision-maker
can consider the next job on the list. After a job has been put on a machine
starting at a certain point in time, the decision-maker is not allowed to preempt
and has to wait till the job is completed. If the objective function is a regular
performance measure, then it may not make sense for the decision-maker to
leave a machine idle when there are still one or more jobs on the list.
The objective functions in online scheduling are similar to those in offline
scheduling. The effectiveness of an online scheduling algorithmis measured by
its competitive ratio with respect to the objective function. An online algorithm
is ρ-competitive if for any problem instance the objective value of the schedule
generated by the algorithmi s at most ρ times larger than the optimal objective
value in case the schedule had been created in an offline manner with all data
known beforehand. The competitive ratio is basically equivalent to a worst case
bound.
Consider the following online counterpart of Pm || Cmax. There are a fixed
number of machines (m) in parallel; this number is known to the decision-maker.
The processing time of a job is at time zero not known to the decision-maker; it
only becomes known upon the completion of a job. When a machine is freed the
decision-maker has to decide whether to assign a job to that machine or keep it
idle. He has to decide without knowing the remaining processing times of the
jobs that are not yet completed and without knowing how many jobs are still
waiting for processing. One well-known algorithmfo r this problem is usually
referred to as the List Scheduling (LIST) algorithm. According to LIST, the
jobs are presented to the decision-maker according to a list and every time the
decision-maker considers the assignment of a job to a machine, he checks the
list and takes the next one from the list. So, every time a machine completes a
job, the decision maker takes the next job from the list and assigns it to that
machine (the decision-maker does not allow for any idle time on the machine).
Theorem 5.6.1. The competitive ratio of the LIST algorithm is 2 − 1
m.
Proof. First, it has to be shown that the competitive ratio of LIST cannot be
better (less) than 2−1/m. Consider a sequence of m(m−1) jobs with running
time 1 followed by one job with running time m. A LIST schedule following this
sequence finishes by time 2m − 1, while the optimal schedule has a makespan
of m.
In order to show that the competitive ratio cannot be larger than 2 − 1/m,
consider the job that finishes last. Suppose it starts at time t and its processing
140 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
time is p. At all tim es before t all machines must have been busy, otherwise the
last job could have started earlier. Hence the optimal makespan Cmax(OPT)
must satisfy
Cmax(OPT) ≥ t + p
m
.
In addition, Cmax(OPT) > p, as the optimal schedule must process the last job.
Fromthese two inequalities, it follows that the makespan of the online solution,
t + p, is bounded froma bove by
t + p = t + p
m
+

1 − 1
m

p ≤

2 − 1
m

Cmax(OPT). 	

Consider now the online counterpart of Pm | prmp | 
Cj . The decisionmaker
only finds out about the processing time of a job the moment it has been
completed.
The following algorithmfo r this online scheduling problemis quite different
fromt he LIST algorithm. The so-called Round Robin (RR) algorithmcycl es
through the list of jobs, giving each job a fixed unit of processing time in turn.
The Round Robin algorithm ensures that at all times any two uncompleted jobs
have received an equal amount of processing time or one job has received just
one unit of processing more than the other. If the unit of processing is made
very small, then the Round Robin rule becomes equivalent to the Processor
Sharing rule (see Example 5.2.9). If the total completion time is the objective
to be minimized, then the competitive ratio of RR can be determined.
Theorem 5.6.2. The competitive ratio of the RR algorithm is 2.
Proof. Assume, for the time being, that the number of jobs, n, is known. In
what follows, it will actually be shown that the worst case ratio of RR is 2 −
2m/(n + m).
In order to show that the worst case ratio cannot be better (lower) than
2−2m/(n+m), it suffices to find an example that attains this bound. Consider
n identical jobs with processing time equal to 1 and let n be a multiple of m. It
is clear that under the Round Robin rule all n jobs are completed at time n/m,
whereas under the nonpreemptive scheduling rule (which is also equivalent to
SPT), m jobs are completed at time 1, m jobs at time 2, and so on. So for this
example the ratio is n2/m divided by
m
2
 n
m
 n
m
+ 1

,
which equals 2 − 2m/(n + m).
It remains to be shown that the worst case ratio cannot be worse (larger) than
2−2m/(n+m). Assume the processing times of the jobs are p1 ≥ p2 ≥ · · · ≥ pn.
Let R(,), , = 1, . . . , n/m, denote the subset of jobs j that satisfy
(, − 1)m < j ≤ ,m.
5.6 Online Scheduling 141
So R(1) contains jobs 1, . . .,m (the longest jobs); R(2) contains jobs m+1,m+
2, . . . , 2m, and so on. It can be shown that the schedule that minimizes the total
completion time is SPT and that the total completion time under SPT is
n
j=1
Cj(OPT) =
n
j=1
Cj(SPT) =
n/m  
=1

j∈R()
,pj.
Consider now the total completion time under RR. Note that Cj denotes the
completion time of the jth longest job. It can be shown now that
Cj(RR) = Cj+1(RR) + (j/m)(pj − pj+1)
for j ≥ m, while
Cj(RR) = Cm+1(RR) + pj − pm+1
for j <m. Eliminating the recurrence yields for j ≥ m
Cj (RR) = j
m
pj +
1
m
n
k=j+1
pk
and for j <m
Cj(RR) = pj +
1
m
n
k=m+1
pk.
A simple calculation establishes that
n
j=1
Cj(RR) =
m
j=1
pj +
n
j=m+1
2j − 1
m
pj .
The ratio

Cj(RR)/

Cj(OPT) is maximized when all the jobs in the same
subset have the same processing time. To see this, note that for OPT (SPT)
the coefficient of pj’s contribution to the total completion time is determined
solely by its subset index. On the other hand, for RR, the coefficient is smaller
for the longer jobs within a specific group. Thus, reducing the value of each
pj to be equal to the smallest processing time of any job in its group can only
increase the ratio. By a similar argument, it can be shown that the worst case
ratio is achieved when n is a multiple of m.
Assume now that each subset contains exactly m jobs of the same length.
Let q denote the common processing time of any job in subset R(,). Then, a
simple calculation shows that
n
j=1
Cj (OPT) =
n/m
=1
m,q,
142 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
and
n
j=1
Cj (RR) =
n/m
=1
m(2, − 1)q.
Once again, the ratio is maximized when all the q are equal, implying that the
worst case ratio is exactly 2 − 2m/(n + m).
Since in online scheduling a competitive ratio is usually not expressed as a
function of n (since the number of jobs is typically not known in advance), the
competitive ratio has to hold for any value of n. It follows that the competitive
ratio for RR is equal to 2. 	

Actually, there are several other variants of the online scheduling paradigm.
The variant considered in this section assumes that the decision-maker does not
know the processing time of a job when it is released. The decision-maker only
finds out what the processing time is when the job is completed. This form of
online scheduling is at times referred to as non-clairvoyant online scheduling.
In another variant of online scheduling, the processing time of a job becomes
known to the decision-maker immediately upon the job’s release. This variant
is often referred to as clairvoyant online scheduling. However, in clairvoyant
online scheduling the decision-maker still does not know how many jobs are
going to be released and when the releases will occur.
An entirely different class of online algorithms are the so-called randomized
online algorithms. A randomized algorithm allows the decision-maker to make
random choices (for example, instead of assigning a job to the machine with the
smallest load, the decision-maker may assign a job to a machine at random). If
randomization is allowed, then it is of interest to know the expected objective
value, where the expectation is taken over the randomc hoices of the algorithm.
A randomized algorithm is σ-competitive if for each instance this expectation
is within a factor of σ of the optimal objective value.
5.7 Discussion
This chapter focuses primarily on parallel machine problems that either are
polynomial time solvable or have certain properties that are of interest. This
chapter does not address the more complicated parallel machine problems that
are strongly NP-hard and have little structure.
A significant amount of research has been done on parallel machine scheduling
problems that are strongly NP-hard. A variety of integer programming
formulations have been developed for Rm || 
wjCj and Rm || 
wjUj. These
integer programs can be solved using a special form of branch-and-bound that is
called branch-and-price and that is often referred to as column generation (see
Appendix A). However, there are many other parallel machine problems that
are more complicated and that have not yet been tackled with exact methods.
Exercises 143
An example of such a very hard problem is Qm | sijk | 
wjTj. This problem
is extremely hard to solve to optimality. It is already hard to find an optimal
solution for instances with, say, 5 machines and 30 jobs. However, this problem
is of considerable interest to industry and many heuristics have been developed
and experimented with. Part III of this book describes several heuristic methods
that have been applied to this problem.
Online scheduling in a parallel machine environment has received a significant
amount of attention during the last couple of years. Online scheduling
is important for several reasons. In practice, it is often the case that a very
limited amount of information is available when a decision must be made, see
Example 1.1.4. From a theoretical point of view, online scheduling is of interest
because it establishes a bridge between deterministic and stochastic scheduling.
In stochastic scheduling decisions also have to be made with only a limited
amount of information available. However, the stochastic scheduling paradigm
is still quite different fromthe online paradigm. Nevertheless, the bounds obtained
in online scheduling often give rise to bounds in stochastic scheduling.
Exercises (Computational)
5.1. Consider P6 || Cmax with 13 jobs.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
pj 6 6 6 7 7 8 8 9 9 10 10 11 11
(a) Compute the makespan under LPT.
(b) Find the optimal schedule.
5.2. Consider P4 | prec | Cmax with 12 jobs.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
pj 10 10 10 12 11 10 12 12 10 10 10 10
The jobs are subject to the precedence constraints depicted in Figure 5.10.
(a) Apply the generalized version of the CP rule: every time a machine is
freed select the job at the head of the string with the largest total amount
of processing.
(b) Apply the generalized version of the LNS rule: every time a machine is
freed select the job that precedes the largest total amount of processing.
(c) Is either one of these two schedules optimal?
5.3. Consider P3 | brkdwn,Mj | Cmax with 8 jobs.
144 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
1 2 3
4 6
5
7 10
8 11
9 12
Fig. 5.10 Precedence constraints graph (Exercise 5.2)
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
pj 10 10 7 7 7 7 7 7
Machines 1 and 2 are available continuously. Machine 3 is not available during
the interval [0, 1]; after time 1 it is available throughout. TheMj sets are defined
as follows:
M1 = {1, 3}
M2 = {2, 3}
M3 = M4 = M5 = {1}
M6 = M7 = M8 = {2}
(a) Apply the LPT rule, i.e., give always priority to the longest job that
can be processed on the machine freed.
(b) Apply the LFJ rule, i.e., give always priority to the least flexible job
while disregarding processing times.
(c) Compute the ratio Cmax(LPT )/Cmax(LFJ).
5.4. Consider P3 | prmp | 
Cj with the additional constraint that the completion
of job j has to be less than or equal to a given fixed deadline dj. Preemptions
may occur only at integer times 1, 2, 3, . . .
Exercises 145
1 2
7
3
4 5
8
10 6
9
11 12
13
Fig. 5.11 Precedence constraints graph (P∞ | prec | Cmax) for
Exercise 5.5
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
pj 2 3 3 5 8 8 8 9 12 14 16
dj ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 11 12 13 28 29
Find the optimal schedule and compute the total completion time.
5.5. Consider P∞ | prec | Cmax
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
pj 5 11 9 8 7 3 8 6 9 2 5 2 9
The precedence constraints are depicted in Figure 5.11. Determine the optimal
makespan and which jobs are critical and which jobs are slack.
5.6. Consider P5 || 
h(Cj) with 11 jobs.
jobs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
pj 5 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 9 9
The function h(Cj) is defined as follows.
h(Cj) =

0 ifCj ≤ 15
Cj − 15 if Cj > 15
146 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
(a) Compute the value of the objective under SPT.
(b) Compute the value of the objective under the optimal schedule.
5.7. Consider again P5 ||

h(Cj ) with the 11 jobs of the previous exercise.
The function h(Cj) is now defined as follows:
h(Cj) =

Cj if Cj ≤ 15
15 if Cj > 15.
(a) Compute the value of the objective function under SPT.
(b) Compute the value of the objective under the optimal schedule.
5.8. Consider Q2 | prmp | Cmax with the jobs
jobs 1 2 3 4
pj 36 24 16 12
and machine speeds v1 = 2 and v2 = 1.
(a) Find the makespan under LRPT when preemptions can only be made
at the time points 0, 4, 8, 12, and so on.
(b) Find the makespan under LRPT when preemptions can only be made
at the time points 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and so on.
(c) Find the makespan under LRPT when preemptions can be made at any
time.
(d) Compare the makespans under (a), (b) and (c).
5.9. Consider the following example of P3 | prmp, brkdwn |

Cj with 6
jobs. Three jobs have a processing time of 1, while the remaining three have
a processing time of 2. There are three machines, but two machines are not
available from time 2 onwards. Determine the optimal schedule. Show that
SRPT is not optimal.
5.10. Consider the following instance of P2 | prmp | Lmax with 4 jobs. Preemptions
are allowed at integer points in time. Find an optimal schedule.
jobs 1 2 3 4
dj 5 6 9 10
pj 4 5 7 9
Exercises 147
Exercises (Theory)
5.11. Consider Pm || Cmax.
(a) Give an example showing that LPT is not necessarily optimal when
the number of jobs is less than or equal to twice the number of machines
(n ≤ 2m).
(b) Show that if an optimal schedule results in at most two jobs on any
machine, then LPT is optimal.
5.12. Consider Pm || Cmax. Describe the processing times of the instance that
attains the worst case bound in Theorem5. 1.1 (as a function of m). (Hint: see
Exercise 5.1.)
5.13. Show that the CP rule is optimal for Pm | outtree, pj = 1 | Cmax.
5.14. Complete the proof of Theorem 5.1.5. That is, show that the CP rule
applied to Pm | intree, pj = 1 | Cmax results in a makespan that is equal to
lmax + c.
5.15. Consider Pm | rj, prmp | Cmax. Formulate the optimal policy and prove
its optimality.
5.16. Consider Pm | prmp, brkdwn | Cmax with the number of machines available
a function of time, i.e., m(t). Show that for any function m(t) LRPT
minimizes the makespan.
5.17. Consider Pm | brkdwn |

Cj with the number of machines available a
function of time, i.e., m(t). Show that if m(t) is increasing the nonpreemptive
SPT rule is optimal.
5.18. Consider Pm | prmp, brkdwn | 
Cj with the number of machines available
a function of time, i.e., m(t). Show that the preemptive SRPT rule is
optimal if m(t) ≥ m(s) − 1 for all s < t.
5.19. Consider Pm | prmp | 
Cj with the added restriction that all jobs must
be finished by some fixed deadline ¯ d, where
¯ d ≥ max

pj
m
, p1, . . . , pn

.
Find the rule that minimizes the total completion time and prove its optimality.
5.20. Consider Pm || 
wjCj . Show that in the worst case example of the
WSPT rule wj has to be approximately equal to pj, for each j.
5.21. Give a characterization of the class of all schedules that are optimal for
Pm || 
Cj . Determine the number of schedules in this class as a function of n
and m.
148 5P arallel Machine Models (Deterministic)
5.22. Consider P2 || 
Cj . Develop a heuristic for minimizing the makespan
subject to total completion time optimality. (Hint: Say a job is of Rank j if
j − 1 jobs follow the job on its machine. With two machines in parallel there
are two jobs in each rank. Consider the difference in the processing times of the
two jobs in the same rank. Base the heuristic on these differences.)
5.23. ConsiderPm | Mj | γ. The setsMj are given. Let Ji denote the set of jobs
that are allowed to be processed on machine i. Show, through a counterexample,
that the sets Mj being nested does not necessarily imply that sets Ji are nested.
Give sufficiency conditions on the set structures under which the Mj sets as well
as the Ji sets are nested.
5.24. Show, through a counterexample, that the CP rule is not necessarily
optimal for Pm | intree, pj = 1 | 
Cj .
5.25. Consider Pm | rj, prmp | Lmax. Show through a counterexample that
the preemptive EDD rule does not necessarily yield an optimal schedule.
5.26. Consider Pm | intree, prmp | Cmax with the processing time of each job
at level k equal to pk. Show that a preemptive version of the generalized CP
rule minimizes the makespan.
5.27. Consider Q∞ | prec, prmp | Cmax. There are an unlimited number of
machines that operate at the same speed. There is one machine that is faster.
Give an algorithm that minimizes the makespan and prove its optimality.
5.28. Consider an online version of Pm | rj, prec | Cmax. An online algorithm
for this problemcan be described as follows. The jobs are again presented
in a list; whenever a machine is freed, the job that ranks highest among the
remaining jobs which are ready for processing is assigned to that machine (i.e.,
it must be a job that already has been released and of which all predecessors
already have been completed). Show that the bound presented in Theorem 5.6.1
applies to this more general problem as well.
Comments and References
The worst case analysis of the LPT rule for Pm || Cmax is fromthe classic
paper by Graham( 1969). This paper gives one of the first examples of worst
case analyses of heuristics (see also Graham( 1966)). It also provides a worst
case analysis of an arbitrary list schedule for Pm || Cmax. A more sophisticated
heuristic for Pm || Cmax, with a tighter worst case bound, is the so-called MULTIFIT
heuristic, see Coffman, Garey and Johnson (1978) and Friesen (1984a).
Lee and Massey (1988) analyze a heuristic that is based on LPT as well as on
MULTIFIT. Hwang, Lee and Chang (2005) performa worst case analysis of the
LPT rule for Pm | brkdwn | Cmax. For results on heuristics for the more general
Qm || Cmax, see Friesen and Langston (1983), Friesen (1984b), and Dobson
Comments and References 149
(1984). Davis and Jaffe (1981) present an algorithmf or Rm || Cmax. The CPM
and PERT procedures have been covered in many papers and textbooks, see for
example, French (1982). The CP result in Theorem 5.1.5 is due to Hu (1961).
See Lenstra and Rinnooy Kan (1978) with regard to Pm | pj = 1, prec | Cmax,
Du and Leung (1989) with regard to P2 | tree | Cmax and Du, Leung and Young
(1991) with regard to P2 | chains | Cmax. Chen and Liu (1975) and Kunde (1976)
analyze the worst case behavior of the CP rule for Pm | pj = 1, prec | Cmax. Lin
and Li (2004) and Li (2006) do a complexity analysis of Pm | pj = 1,Mj | Cmax
and Qm | pj = p,Mj | Cmax. Apparently, no worst case analysis has been done
for the LFJ rule.
For Pm | prmp | Cmax, see McNaughton (1959). For Qm | prmp | Cmax, see
Horvath, Laman d Sethi (1977), Gonzalez and Sahni (1978a) and McCormick
and Pinedo (1995).
Conway,Maxwell and Miller (1967) discuss the SPT rule for Pm || 
Cj; they
also give a characterization of the class of optimal schedules. For a discussion
of Qm || 
Cj , see Horowitz and Sahni (1976). The worst case bound for the
WSPT rule for Pm || 
wjCj is fromKa waguchi and Kyan (1986). Elmaghraby
and Park (1974) and Sarin, Ahn and Bishop (1988) present branch-and-bound
algorithms for this problem. Eck and Pinedo (1993) present a heuristic for
minimizing the makespan and the total completion time simultaneously. The
optimality of the CP rule for Pm | pj = 1, outtree | 
Cj is due to Hu (1961).
For complexity results with regard to Pm | prec | 
Cj , see Sethi (1977) and
Du, Leung and Young (1990).
For an analysis of the Qm | prmp | 
Cj problem, see Lawler and Labetoulle
(1978), Gonzalez and Sahni (1978a), McCormick and Pinedo (1995), Leung and
Pinedo (2003) and Gonzalez, Leung and Pinedo (2006).
A significant amount of work has been done on Qm | rj, pj = p, prmp | γ; see
Garey, Johnson, Simons and Tarjan (1981), Federgruen and Groenevelt (1986),
Lawler and Martel (1989), Martel (1982) and Simons (1983).
For results with regard to Qm | prmp | Lmax, see Bruno and Gonzalez (1976)
and Labetoulle, Lawler, Lenstra and Rinnooy Kan (1984). For other due date
related results, see Sahni and Cho (1979b).
Chen and Powell (1999) and Van den Akker, Hoogeveen and Van de Velde
(1999) applied branch-and-bound methods (including column generation) to
Rm || 
wjCj and Rm || 
wjUj .
The worst case analysis of an arbitrary list schedule for Pm || Cmax is regarded
as one of the basic results in online scheduling. Theorem5. 6.1 is due to
Graham( 1966). The analysis of the Round Robin rule and the total completion
time objective is due to Motwani, Phillips and Torng (1994). Research in online
scheduling has focused on other parallel machine scheduling problems as well;
see, for example, Shmoys, Wein and Williamson (1995). For an overview of online
scheduling on parallel machines with the makespan objective, see Fleischer
and Wahl (2000). For comprehensive overviews of online scheduling, see Sgall
(1998) and Pruhs, Sgall and Torng (2004).